BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking Regarding Policies, Rulemaking 20-05-012
Procedures and Rules for the Self-Generation (Filed May 28, 2020)
Incentive Program and Related Issues
JOINT COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION
COUNCIL AND BMW OF NORTH AMERICA, LLC TO THE ASSIGNED
COMMISSIONER’S SCOPING MEMO AND RULING
Edward Burgess Adam Langton
Policy Director Energy Services Manager
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council BMW of North America, LLC
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400 300 Chestnut Ridge Road
Berkeley, California 94704 Woodcliff Lake, NJ 07677
Tel: (941) 266-0017 Tel: (201) 675-2701
Email: eburgess@vgicouncil.org Email: adam.langton@bmwna.com
September 16, 2020
1

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking Regarding Policies, Rulemaking 20-05-012
Procedures and Rules for the Self-Generation (Filed May 28, 2020)
Incentive Program and Related Issues
JOINT COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION
COUNCIL AND BMW OF NORTH AMERICA, LLC TO THE ASSIGNED
COMMISSIONER’S SCOPING MEMO AND RULING
In accordance with Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) 1 hereby submits
these joint comments on behalf of its members and BMW of North America, LLC (together, “Joint
Commenters”) to the Assigned Commissioner’s Scoping Memo and Ruling (“Scoping Memo”)
issued by Commissioner Rechtschaffen on August 17, 2020. Pursuant to the Scoping Memo, VGIC
timely files these comments to the Scoping Memo on September 16, 2020.
I. INTRODUCTION.
A. Overview of VGIC
VGIC is a 501(c)6 membership-based advocacy group committed to advancing the role of
electric vehicles (“EVs”) and vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”) through policy development,
education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to decarbonized transportation and
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., Connect California LLC, Enel
X North America, Inc., Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, Ford Motor Company, General Motors Company, Nissan North
America, Inc., Nuvve Corporation, and Toyota Motor North America, Inc. The views expressed in these Comments
are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all of the individual VGIC member companies or
supporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/).
2

electric sectors by ensuring the value from EV deployments and flexible EV charging and
discharging is recognized and compensated in support of achieving a more reliable, affordable,
and efficient electric grid.
B. Overview of BMW of North America, LLC
BMW of North America, LLC was established 1975. The BMW Group in the United States
is responsible for marketing, sales, and financial service organizations for the BMW brand, the
MINI brand, and the Rolls-Royce brand of Motor Cars; Designworks USA, an industrial design
firm in California; a technology office in Silicon Valley and various other operations throughout
the country. BMW Manufacturing Co., LLC in South Carolina is part of BMW Group’s global
manufacturing network and is the exclusive manufacturing plant for all X3 and X5 Sports Activity
Vehicles and the X6 Sport Activity Coupe. The BMW Group sales organization is represented in
the U.S. through networks of BMW passenger car centers, BMW motorcycle retailers, MINI
passenger car dealers, and Rolls-Royce Motor Car dealers. BMW (US) Holding Corp., the BMW
Group’s sales headquarters for North, Central and South America, is located in Woodcliff Lake,
New Jersey.
C. Organization of Joint Comments
Joint Comments are organized as follows:
 First, Joint Commenters offer overarching recommendations on consideration of
EVs/EV supply equipment (“EVSE”) in the Self-Generation Incentive Program
(“SGIP”).
 Second, Joint Commenters addresses Scoping Memo questions h, i, j, and k related to
EV/EVSE eligibility in SGIP. Joint Commenters provide several recommendations for the
Commission’s consideration.
3

II. OVERARCHING RECOMMENDATIONS RELATING TO EV/EVSE IN SGIP.
A. SGIP incentives should be made available to eligible vehicle-to-grid (V2G) resources in
the near-term.
Joint Commenters believe that a broad set of VGI technologies, including both V2G and
V1G applications, can and should ultimately be considered for eligibility under the SGIP
framework. We believe both V2G and V1G have a significant potential to realize the ratepayer,
resilience, environmental, and equity benefits associated with V2G resources. Moreover, we think
that V2G solutions in particular are well aligned with the SGIP program objectives. Joint
Commenters consider V2G to describe bi-directional charging solutions that leverage the
embedded energy storage capacity embedded within EVs. This is distinct from “V1G” smart
charging applications. While we believe that V1G offers a similar array of benefits to V2G, we
also recognize V2G is more likely to receive consensus support as an eligible technology under
the SGIP framework at this time, due to its closer resemblance to stationary energy storage
solutions that are currently eligible. Thus, we recognize that the Commission may wish to focus
any near-term efforts to support VGI through SGIP on V2G resources, though we recommend
leaving open the possibility for V1G to be included either now or in the future. Expansion of SGIP
eligibility to VGI solutions would also provide critical information of customer interaction with
VGI strategies more generally that would yield learnings and spillover benefits that may be
considered later.
B. V2G is both an emerging technology and a form of energy storage that fits well within
SGIP’s overall purpose and program design.
4

VGIC notes that V2G solutions are fully dispatchable, and can provide injections of electricity to
the grid. As such, they can be considered a form of generation or energy storage. Thus, to the
extent SGIP has and continue to play a critical role in supporting market transition for stationary
energy storage, VGIC believes that V2G, as a form of storage, should also be considered under
the SGIP framework.
C. EV/EVSE can serve a critical role in supporting SGIP’s equity and resiliency focus.
Joint Commenters acknowledge California’s near-term focus in ensuring the current SGIP
Equity Resiliency Budget be leveraged to benefit our most vulnerable communities in the face of
wildfires and public safety power shutoffs (“PSPS”). Joint Commenters believe that a subset of
VGI strategies focused on resiliency could meaningfully support the goals described in Decision
(D.) 19-09-027 establishing the $100 million equity resiliency budget and D.20-01-021 expanding
the equity resiliency budget to $613 million over five years. As the Commission continues to
consider the appropriate balance between broad-based support for energy storage technologies and
targeted support (including program budget carve-outs) for equity and resilience applications, Joint
Commenters strongly recommend V2G solutions be viewed through a similar lens. SGIP could
meaningfully support V2G market development more broadly while providing targeted support
for EV/EVSE use in resilience applications and to ensure equitable technology deployment. While
there exists a wide range of use cases that may be applicable in this regard, VGIC offers the
following specific examples which could benefit from targeted market transition support:
 Vehicle-to-building (“V2B”) backup power solutions: These solutions use V2G-capable
EV/EVSE systems to provide backup power to on-site load (e.g., critical facilities as
defined in D.19-05-012) in the event of a PSPS, rolling blackouts caused by heat waves,
or other resilience event.
5

 V2G exports for resiliency: These solutions use V2G-capable EV/EVSE systems to provide
backup power to islanded sections of the grid (i.e., microgrids) in the event of a PSPS,
rolling blackouts caused by heat waves, or other resilience event.
The technology and equipment needed to enable these solutions reflect high technological
readiness levels, with most either commercially available now or in the near term. The Nissan
LEAF is currently V2G-capable, and VGIC notes medium- and heavy-duty vehicle (“MHDV”),
for example school busses, OEMs have announced V2G capability. VGIC believes these solutions
can efficiently complement the existing suite of energy storage technologies currently eligible for
the SGIP Equity Resiliency Budget (“ERB”) incentives.
D. Consideration of SGIP incentives for EVs/EVSE should be developed in close
coordination with related policies and programs, such as the Transportation
Electrification Framework (“TEF”)
Joint Commenters believe that SGIP and TEF budgets – perhaps further supplemented by
other program budgets in the future – should represent a complete package of funding available to
the full suite of VGI use cases. To further moderate impacts on SGIP budget, eligibility can be
targeted to specific V2G use cases, such as those supporting SGIP’s current equity and resiliency
focus. However, as an emerging technology, VGIC believes the development of SGIP incentives
for VGI should consider a balance between broad-based support for V2G and targeted support for
SGIP priorities areas such as equity and resilience
E. The various EV/EVSE customer types merit separate consideration under the SGIP
framework due to their important and inherent differences.
Joint Commenters recommend the Commission consider the important differences
between EV fleets, commercial EVSE site hosts, and residential customers as they relate to
EV/EVSE adoption and use. EV fleets, such as commercial delivery fleets, may be more likely to
6

utilize VGI strategies to optimally shape their charging and discharging profiles in response to
price signals. Commercial EVSE site hosts, in contrast, may have less flexibility as the EV owner
is unlikely to be the same as the EVSE owner. While single family home (“SFH”) residential
customers may not have this split ownership problem, multi-unit dwelling (“MUD”) customers
may operate under one of several charging and parking norms in which they do not own the EVSE.
For many SFH residential customers, flexible charging/discharging may need to be performed
“behind the scenes” by an automotive original equipment manufacturer (“OEM”) or EV service
provider (“EVSP”) in order to simplify the customer experience. While these example customer
segments do not reflect the full constellation of EV/EVSE ownership models and customer types,
they do demonstrate some of the most notable differences. As such, Joint Commenters recommend
the Commission consider a modest level of customization to accommodate the unique
characteristics and capabilities of each customer type. At a minimum, SGIP incentives for VGI
should be allocated separately for commercial and residential customers, similar to the manner in
which it is allocated for other forms of energy storage.
Joint Commenters acknowledge California’s near-term focus in ensuring the current SGIP
ERB be leveraged to benefit our most vulnerable communities in the face of wildfires and public
safety power shutoffs (“PSPS”). While Joint Commenters support a broad-based strategy to
accelerate market transformation of VGI overall, we believes that a subset of VGI strategies
focused on equity and/or resiliency should be considered and could meaningfully support the goals
described in Decision (D.) 19-09-027 and D.20-01-021 establishing the budgets over the next five
years. As mentioned above, VGIC has been active in other Commission proceedings and
stakeholder processes such as the VGI Working Group where we have articulated the meaningful
role that VGI could play in providing resiliency services the form of backup power (including for
7

PSPS events). We have also detailed how VGI can help lower the total cost of EV ownership,
therefore contributing to equity goals. Additionally, SGIP support for VGI could be targeted
towards deployments of EVs and EVSEs that benefit disadvantaged communities. These benefits
could accrue both in terms of the direct investment in disadvantaged communities as well as
through alleviating pollution burden in those communities by accelerated transportation
electrification.
III. QUESTION H: HOW CAN SGIP INCENTIVES FACILITATE USE OF EV
ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS AND/OR EVSE TO REDUCE PEAK LOAD ON
THE GRID AND/OR TO CHARGE THE STORAGE SYSTEM WHEN EXCESS
ELECTRICITY IS AVAILABLE?
F. V2G represents an immense potential to reduce peak load.
Assuming 3.45 million SFH EVSE by 2030,2 an average EVSE power rating of 10 kW,3
and a modest 5% participation rate in a V2G program, tariff, or incentive intended to provide
capacity during a grid reliability event, Joint Commenters estimate that California’s SFH-dwelling
EVs alone could provide over 1,725 MW of peak reduction during peak times in 2030 – a
significant contribution to California’s resource needs. This estimated capacity value is doubled
(to 3,450 MW) if vehicles are also encouraged to discharge during peak times. Note this estimate
does not include the capacity of MHDV, which have a considerably higher average battery energy
capacity than light-duty vehicles (“LDV”).
In addition to meeting peak demand, EVs and EVSEs are readily able to absorb excess
generation from solar as long as retail rate structures, including time of use (TOU) and real-time
2 Eric Wood et al. Presentation - Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Projection Tool (EVI-Pro). National Renewable
Energy Laboratory. August 3, 2020. California Energy Commission Docket Number 20-IEPR-02
https://efiling.energy.ca.gov/GetDocument.aspx?tn=234215&DocumentContentId=67051
3 Assumes a mix of Level 1 (“L1”) and Level 2 (“L2”) chargers.
8

pricing (RTP) options are available to encourage this through lower daytime rates. This could be
further enhanced by support for workplace charging that targets EV charging during daytime
hours.
G. Current strategies to promote EV peak load reduction and charging when excess
electricity is available do not adequately leverage the energy storage capacity embedded
within EVs.
All three major investor-owned utilities (“IOUs”) offer time-varying EV rates, and some
are in the process of developing dynamic EV rates to specifically support peak load reduction. For
example, Southern California Edison’s (“SCE”) residential EV TOU rate provides a price signal
to charge during off-peak times, but is not designed to incent increased charging specifically during
times of excess electricity availability (i.e., either on-site or grid-sourced mid-day solar
generation). However, these rates fall short of the full potential for integrating EVs with the grid,
which includes not just charging during off-peak times, but also discharging or exporting during
peak times through V2G capabilities. Current no retail rates or programs (or even wholesale
participation options such as Proxy Demand Response) are designed to facilitate bi-directional
charging capabilities which could essentially double the effectiveness of unidirectional
capabilities.
Another significant gap in encouraging flexible EV charging and discharging is the onerous
requirement for some customers to install a separate meter to be eligible for an EV rate, which
precludes access to existing demand response market products and other value streams that are
supported by the presence of behind-the-meter (“BTM”) load. Joint Commenters believe SGIP
could play a critical role in supporting the nascent EV/EVSE market in this regard by incentivizing
9

an important technology set that is otherwise prohibited from accessing and stacking value
streams.
H. Existing transportation electrification incentives are not designed to promote EV peak
load reduction and charging when excess electricity is available.
Joint Commenters acknowledge that a given EV buyer may be eligible to receive both
federal and/or state tax incentives for their vehicle purchase, and an EVSE buyer may be eligible
for state, local, and/or utility rebates. Notably, several OEMs have already surpassed or are fast-
approaching the sales threshold to begin phasing out the federal EV tax credit. Additionally, the
Furthermore, neither the federal EV tax credit and other EV/EVSE incentives are designed to
promote vehicle-grid integration and flexible charging and/or discharging behavior. Joint
Commenters reiterate that no existing EV or EVSE incentives leverage the energy storage
capabilities of V2G-capable EV/EVSE systems. Therefore, VGIC reiterates the potential for
SGIP to critically support the nascent market for V2G energy storage capabilities.
IV. QUESTION I: HOW CAN SGIP INCENTIVES FACILITATE USE OF EV
STORAGE SYSTEMS AND/OR EVSE TO REDUCE GRID GHG EMISSIONS?
A. SGIP incentives can play a critical role in encouraging EV/EVSE charging and/or
discharging behavior that significantly reduces grid GHG emissions.
SGIP incentives for EV/EVSE can lead to marginal emissions reductions on the grid by
aligning EV charging with excess renewables and discharging with peak times when GHG
emissions from grid electricity (due to fossil fuel peaking plants) tend to be greatest. VGIC
recommends the Commission consider how automotive OEMs and/or EVSPs could support their
customers in responding to GHG price signals as part of SGIP incentives, including by performing
“behind the scenes” charge/discharge management.
10

B. As detailed above, Joint Commenters do not recommend SGIP incentives be
made available to all EV/EVSE regardless of capabilities. However, to the extent SGIP
incentives can supportSGIP incentives for EV/EVSE can also promote GHG emissions
reductions beyond the grid by supporting broader transportation electrification goals.
If SGIP incentives are provided to VGI-capable EV or EVSE, this would provide an incremental
financial benefit to either the owner or provider of this equipment and would in turn help to
accelerate overall EV adoption and transportation electrification goals. However, to the extent
SGIP incentives can play a role in supporting these broader transportation electrification through
its focus on a specific subset of V2G-capable EV/EVSE systems as part of the broader portfolio
of TE and VGI related efforts. , The added financial benefit to EV customers and manufacturers
will help to displace the sale and, more importantly, vehicle miles travelled (“VMT”) of internal
combustion engine (“ICE”) vehicles which contribute significantly to transportation sector
emissions, which represent the largest source of the state’s GHG emissions by sector.
V. QUESTION J: HOW CAN SGIP INCENTIVES FACILITATE USE OF EV
STORAGE SYSTEMS AND/OR EVSE TO PROVIDE OTHER BENEFITS OF
ELECTRIC VEHICLE GRID INTEGRATIONS (AS DEFINED IN SECTION
740.16)?
VGIC believes that SGIP incentives can be leveraged to help develop the overall market
for VGI technologies by filling in certain gaps where there is either no market incentive, or the
market mechanisms that do exist are ill-suited for EVs and/or EVSEs. The above sections describe
how we believe SGIP incentives can be coordinated with other VGI program offering being
developed (e.g. through the TEF) to ensure that any remaining gaps are addressed. Recently VGIC
joined with several other parties to submit comments on VGI Issues including those related to SB
11

676 and Section 740.16.4 Through these comments we identified the need for the IOUs to develop
an overall VGI Portfolio that would include a variety of programs, rates, and market offerings to
support beneficial VGI in conjunction with overall TE efforts. As port of this portfolio effort, we
identified several potentially sources of funding, as well as certain “revenue neutral” program
elements. One of the potential sources of funding identified was the SGIP program, which if
developed to include EVs and/or EVSEs, could support discrete elements of the overall VGI
portfolio that were not supported through the TE Plans under the TEF or other funding sources.
Moreover, Joint Commenters believe that existing market participation options are
insufficient to support robust VGI activities. Much like stationary energy storage, EVs faces many
of the same barriers as other distributed resources when attempting to provide wholesale market
products. For example, existing CAISO participation models such as Proxy Demand Response do
not allow for storage exports (analogous to V2G) to be properly credited. Moreover, EVs also face
fundamentally different barriers due to the fact that separately metered charging stations do not
have any on-site load that would allow for ‘baselining’ under a standard demand response
approach. Due to these and other market barriers that exist today, Joint Commenters believe it is
critical for the Commission to provide other avenues of support for V2G. Support for V2G market
transformation is especially critical now since a large number of new EV models are in stages of
product development and manufacturing for launch in the 2021-2022 timeframe. Support from
SGIP would help to ensure this promising technology is indeed included in these new EV models
even when current market signals are insufficient.
4 Joint Comments of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council, Enel X North America, Inc. , Advanced Energy Economy,
California Energy Storage Alliance, Chargepoint, Inc., Environmental Defense Fund, Greenlots, Natural Resources
Defense Council, and Siemens on Email Ruling Seeking Party Comment on Vehicle-Grid Integration Issues in R.18-
12-006 (“DRIVE OIR”)
12

VI. QUESTION K: HOW CAN THE COMMISSION ENSURE THAT EV STORAGE
SYSTEMS AND/OR EVSE THAT RECEIVE SGIP INCENTIVES ARE USED TO
PROVIDE LONG-TERM BENEFITS TO RATEPAYERS?
Joint Commenters recognize the Commission’s concerns about the “permanence” of EV
storage systems and/or EVSE that receive incentive from SGIP due to the possibility that EVs may
ultimately travel out of state and no longer provide benefits to California ratepayers. However,
Joint Commenters believe there are several mitigating factors that would limit this from happening
thus ensuring that nearly all SGIP incentives directed towards EV storage systems and EVSE
would continue to provide long-term benefits to California ratepayers. The two main factors are a)
the fact that many EV and/or EVSE installations are in fixed locations, and b) the fact that the
EV/EVSE portion of SGIP can be designed to track performance and respond as issues arise.
A. A large share of EV storage systems and/or EVSE are in fixed locations
Joint Commenters note that a large share of potential EV-related facilities eligible for SGIP
incentives will be in the form of EVSE. Once installed, these facilities are generally fixed to a
particular location and customer site. This effectively guarantees their permanency within
California, and in turn guarantees that their usage over the long-term will be for the benefit of
California ratepayers. Additionally, Joint Commenters anticipate that another large share of the
available EV-related incentives could go towards EV fleets serving California businesses,
governments, and schools. These customer types are similarly fixed in terms of their location
within the state and therefore pose little to no risk of not serving California ratepayers over the
long term. While not all EV storage and/or EVSE fall into these categories, Joint Commenters
believe that long-term benefits can still be ensured through good program design.
B. SGIP incentive program design to help ensure long-term benefits to ratepayers from EV
and/or EVSE recipients
13

As mentioned above, other steps can be taken through the design of the SGIP incentives
for EVs and/or EVSEs to ensure long-term benefits are accruing to California ratepayers. Three
possible steps are outlined below:
1. Linking incentive payments to interconnection
Presently, bi-directionally capable EVs (i.e. V2G systems) may be limited from exporting
power to the grid in California depending on inverter configuration (i.e., on-board vs contained
within EVSE), in part due to lack of interconnection pathways under Rule 21. However, VGIC
notes that this is an issue the Commission is actively addressing. In fact, a Proposed Decision in
R.17-07-007 was recently issued that could ensure interconnection pathways some configurations
of bi-directional capabilities (i.e., V2G DC and pilots for V2G AC) and advance the possibility of
other forms in the future (i.e., V2G AC). Joint Commenters anticipate that all bi-directionally
capable EV systems would thus likely need to go through some form interconnection process
before being able to export to the grid. Thus, one way to help ensure permanency in the case of
EV storage systems would be to link the SGIP incentive payments to the current or future
interconnection process that may be required for V2G capabilities.
2. Potential participant data reporting
Joint Commenters believe that one possible way to help ensure that EV and EVSE systems
that receive incentives are functioning as intended is to track and monitor program performance
through reporting requirements. For example, vehicle OEM telematics data and/or EVSE
submetering could be provided on a regular basis (e.g., annually) to track over time how charging
and discharging is occurring among participating EVs and EVSEs. If deficiencies are detected
through this reporting, program elements could be modified as needed over time.
14

3. Potential performance-based components
Joint Commenters recognize that other SGIP program participants, particularly those in the
commercial sector, have been subject to a performance-based requirement for a portion of the
incentive. Joint Commenters suggest that a similar approach could be explored for any SGIP
incentives being applied to larger scale EVSE systems (e.g., DCFC) or commercial EV fleets.
These performance criteria would help ensure long-term benefits to California ratepayers. Much
like other SGIP technology segments, Joint Commenters also recommend that these performance
criteria not be applied to residential customers / small scale systems. Instead, the tracking and
reporting approach described above should be sufficient to monitor performance and ensure long-
term benefits are being delivered.
VIII. CONCLUSION.
Joint Commenters appreciate the opportunity to submit these comments to the SGIP
Scoping Memo on EV/EVSE eligibility. We look forward to further collaboration with the
Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Edward Burgess /s/ Adam Langton
Edward Burgess Adam Langton
Policy Director Energy Services Manager
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council BMW of North America, LLC
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400 300 Chestnut Ridge Road
Berkeley, California 94704 Woodcliff Lake, NJ 07677
Tel: (941) 266-0017 Tel: (201) 675-2701
Email: eburgess@vgicouncil.org Email: adam.langton@bmwna.com
15

Date: September 16, 2020
16