BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Continue Rulemaking 18-12-006
the Development of Rates and (Filed December 13, 2018)
Infrastructure for Vehicle Electrification.
JOINT OPENING COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL,
AMERICAN HONDA MOTOR CO., INC., ENEL X NORTH AMERICA, INC.,
ADVANCED ENERGY ECONOMY, CALIFORNIA ENERGY STORAGE ALLIANCE,
ENVIRONMENTAL DEFENSE FUND, EVBOX NORTH AMERICA, GREENLOTS,
NATURAL RESOURCES DEFENSE COUNCIL, AND SIEMENS ON PROPOSED
DECISION CONCERNING IMPLEMENTATION OF SENATE BILL 676
December 3, 2020
EDWARD BURGESS RYAN HARTY
ZACH WOOGEN American Honda Motor Co., Inc.
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council 1919 Torrance Blvd.
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400 Torrance, CA 90501
Berkeley, CA 94704 Tel: (310) 783-3962
Tel: (510) 665-7811 Email: ryan_harty@ahm.honda.com
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
MARC MONBOUQUETTE MATT STANBERRY
Enel X North America, Inc. Advanced Energy Economy
846 Bransten Road 1000 Vermont Ave. NW, 3rd Floor,
San Carlos, CA 94070 Washington, D.C. 20005
Tel: (415) 488-6035 Tel: (202) 380-1950
Email: marc.monbouquette@enel.com Email: mstanberry@aee.net
JIN NOH LARISSA KOEHLER
California Energy Storage Alliance PAMELA MACDOUGALL
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400 Environmental Defense Fund
Berkeley, CA 94704 123 Mission Street, 28th Floor
Tel: (510) 665 7811 San Francisco, CA 94105
Email: cesa_regulatory@storagealliance.org Tel: (415) 293-6093
Email: lkoehler@edf.org

MEGHA LAKHCHAURA THOMAS ASHLEY
EVBox, North America Greenlots
1930 Innovation Way, Suite 200 767 S. Alameda St, Suite 200
Libertyville, IL 60048 Los Angeles, CA 90021
Tel: (310) 309-7775 Tel: (802) 922-5585
Email: megha.lakhchaura@evbox.com Email: tom@greenlots.com
MILES MULLER CHRIS KING
Natural Resources Defense Council Siemens
111 Sutter Street, 21st Floor 721 Shell Blvd, Suite 205
San Francisco, CA 94104 Foster City, CA 94404
Tel: (415) 875-8254 Tel: (510) 435 5189
Email: mmuller@nrdc.org Email: chris_king@siemens.com

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION. ......................................................................................................... 1
II. THE PD REPRESENTS A STRONG FOUNDATION BUT LACKS CRITICAL
DIRECTION AND ACCOUNTABILITY MEASURES TO ENSURE VGI
STRATEGIES ARE IMPLEMENTED. ................................................................................. 2
III. RECOMMENDED REVISIONS. ................................................................................. 2
A. Ordering Paragraph (“OP”) 4 should include a date certain by which investor owned
utilities (“IOUs”) must propose Automated or Active Load Management (“ALM”)
deployment strategies, and require the inclusion of a tariff design and methodology. .......... 2
B. The Commission should include more specific direction on how and when a credit-
for-export scheme should be pursued. .................................................................................... 5
C. OP 8 should be revised to ensure continued progress towards VGI participation as
Demand Response (“DR”) resources beyond the proposed workshop in Q1, 2021. Joint
Commenters recommend targeting a pathway towards 200 MW of VGI in the 2023-2027
DR portfolio cycle................................................................................................................... 5
D. OP 11 should be revised to specify how to develop pathways to scale implementation
and allow budget flexibility with California IOU’s Emerging Technologies program. ......... 6
F. The PDs should create pathways for meaningful action to facilitate V2G
interconnection. ....................................................................................................................... 8
G. OP 5 should be revised to provide a pathway to marketing, education, and outreach
(“ME&O”) funds to ensure meaningful and lasting implementation ..................................... 8
H. OP 6 should be revised to account for the role of automotive original equipment
manufacturers (“OEMs”)/EV service providers (“EVSPs”) in customer education and
evaluation concerning ALM systems and other VGI strategies ............................................. 9
IV. KEY AREAS REQUIRING CLARIFICATION OR EXPANSION. ...................... 10
A. Criteria used to determine whether a strategy should be adopted pursuant to SB 676
excludes strategies that may provide significant net benefits to ratepayers ......................... 10
B. Several key terms are left undefined .......................................................................... 11
C. The Commission should provide more detail on how adoption of Reform Retail Rates
as a VGI strategy interacts with the draft TEF ..................................................................... 12
D. Joint Commenters respectfully request clarification that non-interconnection technical
standards are adopted pursuant to SB 676 ............................................................................ 12
E. Stakeholders would benefit from an Appendix that illustrates the overlapping
timelines stemming from the PD .......................................................................................... 12
F. A focus on unique aspects of VGI opportunities for the MD/HD EV sector is still
lacking ................................................................................................................................... 13
V. CONCLUSION. ............................................................................................................ 13

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Continue the
Rulemaking 18-12-006
Development of Rates and Infrastructure for
(Filed December 13, 2018)
Vehicle Electrification.
JOINT OPENING COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL,
AMERICAN HONDA MOTOR CO., INC., ENEL X NORTH AMERICA, INC.,
ADVANCED ENERGY ECONOMY, CALIFORNIA ENERGY STORAGE ALLIANCE,
ENVIRONMENTAL DEFENSE FUND, EVBOX NORTH AMERICA, GREENLOTS,
NATURAL RESOURCES DEFENSE COUNCIL, AND SIEMENS ON PROPOSED
DECISION CONCERNING IMPLEMENTATION OF SENATE BILL 676
I. INTRODUCTION.
In accordance with Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle Grid Integration Council1 provides these opening
comments on behalf of its members and supporters, and jointly with American Honda Motor
Co., Inc., Enel X North America, Inc., Advanced Energy Economy, California Energy Storage
Alliance, Environmental Defense Fund, EVBox North America, Greenlots, Natural Resources
Defense Council, and Siemens (“Joint Commenters”) on the Proposed Decision Concerning
Implementation of Senate Bill 676 and Vehicle-to-Grid Integration Strategies (“PD”)2 issued on
November 13, 2020.
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., Connect California LLC, Enel
X North America, Inc., Fermata, LLC., Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, Ford Motor Company, General Motors
Company, Nissan North America, Inc., Nuvve Corporation, The Mobility House, and Toyota Motor North America,
Inc. The views expressed in these Comments are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all of the
individual VGIC member companies or supporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/).
2 Joint Commenters note that the Commission appears to have made an error in the title of this PD that should be
corrected for the sake of clarity and accuracy – rather than “vehicle-to-grid integration strategies” the Commission
should reference “vehicle-grid integration strategies” as vehicle-to-grid (“V2G”) is a discrete sub-topic to VGI more
broadly.
1

II. THE PD REPRESENTS A STRONG FOUNDATION BUT LACKS CRITICAL
DIRECTION AND ACCOUNTABILITY MEASURES TO ENSURE VGI
STRATEGIES ARE IMPLEMENTED.
Joint Commenters commend the Commission, Energy Division staff, and stakeholders for
their efforts leading up to the PD. The year-long Vehicle-Grid Integration Working Group (“VGI
WG”) effort and Final Report, the August 2020 Energy Division Staff Paper on Vehicle Grid
Integration (“VGI”) Implementation, and the Draft Transportation Electrification Framework,
reflect significant stakeholder work and engagement, and Joint Commenters are generally
pleased to see party recommendations referenced and adopted, including the key VGI WG Final
Report. Joint Commenters believe the PD represents a strong foundation for VGI and applauds
the Commission for adopting VGI strategies pursuant to SB 676 (Bradford, 2019) and the
Commission’s authority to advance VGI generally under this rulemaking and SB 350 (De Leon,
2015). However, while a step in the right direction, the PD will benefit from additional
specificity, direction and accountability as to how stakeholders can assure California’s success in
carrying forward VGI objectives which align with State policies and Orders. Joint Commenters
suggest that the Commission provide more clarity in several of the ordering paragraphs and
include more concrete next steps to advance VGI. Specific recommended revisions are provided
in the following section.
III. RECOMMENDED REVISIONS.
(Note that Joint Commenters have compiled all recommended redlines to the PD in Appendix A.)
A. Ordering Paragraph (“OP”) 4 should include a date certain by which investor owned
utilities (“IOUs”) must propose Automated or Active Load Management (“ALM”)
deployment strategies, and require the inclusion of a tariff design and methodology.
Joint Commenters appreciate the PD’s consideration of ALM technologies as an alternative
to often costly distribution system upgrades for electric vehicle (“EV”) charging stations and a
critical VGI strategy. As reflected frequently in the record of this proceeding, enabling customers
to elect ALM and implement solutions from an open marketplace will likely result in distribution
2

system cost savings both within transportation electrification (“TE”) infrastructure programs and
more generally, which will introduce novel classes of ratepayer benefits.3
The PD correctly directs the IOUs to consider ALM capabilities in all future rules, tariff filings,
and TE applications – reflecting the PD’s guidance to consider VGI across all relevant business
activities – and also to determine criteria to evaluate where ALM would benefit ratepayers while
still meeting site host charging needs. This is timely, given the direction under AB 841 (Ting,
2020) for the IOUs to file, by February 28, 2021, “a new tariff or rule that authorizes each
electrical corporation to design and deploy all electrical distribution infrastructure on the utility
side of the customer’s meter for all customers installing separately metered infrastructure to
support charging stations, other than those in single-family residences.”
Joint Commenters believe that OP 4 should be amended to explicitly harmonize the
implementation of ALM with the IOUs’ near-term proposal for a utility-side distribution
infrastructure tariff under AB 841. ALM could be considered as an accompaniment to the
forthcoming AB 841 tariff, or through a standalone ALM tariff, as a standard component of
routine utility-side infrastructure service for EV charging. The ALM offering should be
structured to return a portion of the avoided cost of ratepayer funded customer- or utility-side
infrastructure to the customer as an incentive to encourage the use of ALM as a cost-effective
measure that delivers net ratepayer value and lowers the cost of EV supply equipment (“EVSE”)
investments. As an example of how an ALM tariff could be structured, customers that seek to
install new charging stations could be provided, in advance, with an optional ALM rider that
includes a site-specific schedule of options based on the required secondary distribution upgrades
at various levels of maximum EV charging capacity. The schedule would also include a
customer rebate or rate discount computed using a predetermined methodology, to incentivize
the use of ALM in lieu of electing distribution upgrades. Customers could then elect from the
3 See, for example, Joint Commenters opening comments at 8-9, VGI WG recommendations 2.04 and 2.17, Pacific
Gas and Electric Company Electric Vehicle Infrastructure OIR Rulemaking 18-12-006 Data Response October 13,
2020, CALSTART Opening Comments on the Draft Transportation Electrification Framework (“Draft TEF”)
Section 11 at 4, and Draft TE Framework at 23. It is worth noting that the value of ALM in avoiding or deferring
distribution system upgrade costs is a common experience in TE planning, including in Europe. See, for example,
The future for heavy-duty vehicles in the Pentalateral Region: Integration electromobility in the energy transition,
October 22, 2020, https://www.irena.org/events/2020/Oct/Heavy-Duty-Vehicles-in-the-Penta-Region
3

schedule of options an appropriate level of ALM (including no ALM, if the customer wishes to
enable charging at full nameplate capacity).
% of Nameplate Maximum kVA Required Rebate amount //
Rating (maximum rating of EVSE Distribution rate discount
under ALM) under ALM (total Upgrade/Make Ready
/ per port @ 20 Costs
total)
100% (default, no 200 / 10 $200,000 $0
ALM)
90% 180 / 9 $200,000 $0
80% 160 / 8 $150,000 $25,000
70% 140 / 7 $150,000 $25,000
60% 120 / 6 $150,000 $25,000
50% 100 / 5 $100,000 $50,000
These ALM tariff concepts are equally applicable to ratepayer-funded IOU TE programs that
fund customer-side infrastructure as they are to utility-side infrastructure that will become a
routine IOU service. However, in order to maximize the ratepayer benefits of ALM – not to
mention VGI broadly4 – the Commission, through its TE programs and practices, should seek to
encourage incorporating EV charging into existing sites’ service drops and building loads to the
greatest extent possible. Indeed, new and separately metered service will in many instances be a
necessary and cost-effective measure to bring new EV charging load online. But, in many other
instances, sites have adequate transformer, panel, and wires capacity to accommodate EV
charging, or ALM can be used to incorporate new charging load within the available capacity
that the site already has. As such, we recommend that OP 4 is amended to explicitly reference
how ALM can be used to support TE installation at equal or lesser costs than hardware-based
electrical capacity “at an existing utility service.” Finally, the PD should also be revised
throughout to make it more explicit that ALM measures can be provided by third parties as long
as they meet relevant technical and safety standards. Joint Commenters recommend revisions to
OP 4 and Finding of Fact 13 are presented in Appendix A.
4 For instance, intermingling EV charging load with building loads is necessary to enable V2G participation in
Demand Response offerings that, as currently structured, allow for reducing a site’s load but prohibit exporting
power to the grid.
4

B. The Commission should include more specific direction on how and when a credit-for-
export scheme should be pursued.
Regarding the credit-for-export concept, the PD states “exploration of such a scheme should
be pursued.” 5 However, other than this generally supportive statement, there are no specific
actions that would lead to tangible next steps needed for the IOUs and other stakeholders to
pursue this option. Joint Commenters request the Commission revise the PD to clarify this
statement, specifically regarding how the concept should be pursued, by when, and in which
proceeding – as well as metrics that enable measurement of successful strategy implementation.
The PD mentions the current Net Energy Metering (“NEM 3.0”) proceeding (R.20-08-020) as a
potential venue to explore compensation mechanisms for EV exports; however a recent Scoping
Ruling issued in that proceeding – issued after the PD in this proceeding – does not currently
include consideration of exports from EVs in its scope.6 Furthermore, given the potentially
contentious nature of the NEM 3.0 proceeding and its predominant focus on rooftop solar PV,
the Joint Commenters are concerned that this will not be a productive venue for exploring a
novel credit for export mechanism related to EVs. Instead, Joint Commenters recommend, based
on the status of the current NEM proceeding, that the PD be revised to direct meaningful action
towards a credit-for-export scheme. Specifically, we recommend including an additional
ordering paragraph requiring IOUs to issue an application within 180 days for a credit-for-export
tariff for residential customers that is time variant - an EV time-of-use (“TOU”) rate - and allow
for stakeholder comment. Additionally, we recommend the Commission introduce methods
which incorporate Carbon Intensity metrics to substantiate rational value for export episodes
based on carbon savings directly resulting from VGI dispatch.
C. OP 8 should be revised to ensure continued progress towards VGI participation as
Demand Response (“DR”) resources beyond the proposed workshop in Q1, 2021. Joint
Commenters recommend targeting a pathway towards 200 MW of VGI in the 2023-2027
DR portfolio cycle.
Regarding the near-term VGI policy action of DR, the PD states, “incorporating VGI
strategies into any existing [DR] program may require education for potential market participants
5 PD at 31.
6 See Joint Assigned Commissioner’s Scoping Memo and Administrative Law Judge Ruling Directing Comments on
Proposed Guiding Principles issued in R.20-08-020 on November 19, 2020.
5

and consideration of whether the program design could accommodate VGI strategies.”7 Joint
Commenters appreciate the Commission’s efforts to ensure market participants are well-
informed. However, Joint Commenters believe the finite resources of the IOUs and stakeholders
may be better spent on a solutions-oriented workshop, which would briefly summarize known
barriers to behind-the-meter DR participation (e.g. metering requirements, baselining, and
availability requirements) and devote most of the agenda to identifying potential strategies to
overcome these barriers. Joint Commenter’s primary concern with section 6.3 on DR and the
corresponding OP 8 is the lack of action required following the post-workshop report. As such,
Joint Commenters strongly urge the Commission to direct a more concrete set of actions
following the workshop. More specifically, we believe the proposed post-workshop report
should include an explanation of a viable pathway for enabling 200 MW of VGI as DR resources
within the next DR portfolio cycle (2023-2027) by alleviating barriers to the extent possible.
Joint Commenters strongly believe this could send a strong market signal and, ultimately, lead to
greater VGI participation in DR programs and market products. The Joint Commenters believe
200 MW is a reasonable starting point given the fact that the current 2018-2022 cycle DR
portfolios already contain over 1,600 MW of demand response resources (~550 MW for PG&E,
~1,000 MW for SCE, and ~60 MW for SDG&E in 2022). Additionally, VGIC recently estimated
the potential for up to 1,500 MW of VGI DR resources by 2025 even at a modest 5%
participation level.8 Finally, the Joint commenters recommend that final decision direct any VGI
DR workshop also be jointly noticed to the Emergency Reliability rulemaking (R.20-11-003) and
Resource Adequacy rulemaking (R.19-11-009). To that end, we suggest OP 8 be modified per
Appendix A redlines.
D. OP 11 should be revised to specify how to develop pathways to scale implementation and
allow budget flexibility with California IOU’s Emerging Technologies program.
The PD currently states: “Pilots should address practical barriers to VGI-enabling technologies
that have already been demonstrated and develop pathways to scale implementation through
existing or potential new IOU programs that would further the goals of SB 676.”9 As noted in
7 PD at 32.
8 Reply Comments of The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council on The
Transportation Electrification Framework (Sections 11.1 And 11.2), at 7, September 4, 2020
9 PD at 39.
6

reply comments, Joint Commenters stress that there is a significant risk associated with “over-
piloting” solutions that may be well-suited to large-scale implementation through a utility
program, VGI rate mechanism, or third party aggregator implementation.10 As such, even if the
Commission continues to compile learnings through pilots, Joint Commenters urge the
Commission to provide additional clarity on how the IOUs should “develop pathways to scale
implementation” beyond the pilot phase. Specifically, the Commission should direct IOUs to
identify a timeframe for how emerging technologies can ultimately be moved into a more wide-
scale, long-term component of the TE plans.
Setting aside concerns about overreliance on pilots, the Joint Commenters believe the proposed
level of funding for VGI pilots and emerging technologies is appropriate at this time. We note
that the success of some potential pilots, and the utilization of these funds may partly depend
upon the ongoing deliberations regarding vehicle-to-grid alternating current (“V2G AC”) pilot
safety protocols, and the successful implementation of the newly clarified vehicle-to-grid direct
current (“V2G DC”) interconnection pathway as approved in D.20-09-035. It is possible that
there could be unforeseen delays or barriers in these efforts. As such, we suggest that the
Commission offer some budget flexibility in the event the pilot funding is undersubscribed. For
example, if the proposed $35 million in pilot funding is not fully utilized, we suggest it could be
applied to an appropriate category within the Emerging Technologies program or other VGI-
related program alternates. OP 11 should be modified to reflect that flexibility.
E. Commission direction concerning IOUs’ collaboration with the California
Independent System Operator (“CAISO”) should impose a reporting requirement to
ensure responsible and effective outcomes.
Joint Commenters acknowledge that the Commission and IOUs cannot set wholesale market
rules or access and appreciates the Commission’s direction for the IOUs to collaborate with the
CAISO on these opportunities. Specifically, the PD states IOUs “shall collaborate with CAISO
where beneficial and report on reforms to wholesale market rules and access that advance VGI
strategies.”11 However, Joint Commenters are concerned that this language may be too vague to
achieve that outcome and may not accurately describe the recommendations for the respective
10 Joint Commenters reply comments at 9.
11 PD at 18.
7

roles of the CAISO, the Commission, and the IOUs. The record of this proceeding and the VGI
WG Final Report contain ample discussion on the barriers related to wholesale market
participation, many of which do require the Commission and IOUs to serve as the lead actors.12
As such, Joint Commenters request both OP 1 and OP 3 be revised as per our redlines in
Appendix A. The Joint Commenters also recommend that the Commission direct this
collaboration to include a focus on overcoming known barriers for VGI participation in DR,
including baselining, submetering, telemetry, and export credit, and discussion of how EVs may
offer novel solutions through vehicle telemetry options.
F. The PDs should create pathways for meaningful action to facilitate V2G
interconnection.
Joint Commenters observe the PD does not detail how adoption of interconnection technical
standards as a VGI strategy pursuant to SB 676 will interact with ongoing policy efforts. Instead,
the PD states that: “Most of these reforms should be addressed in the Commission’s dedicated
proceeding on interconnection and Electric Rule 21 – R.17-07-007.”13 We agree that most of the
necessary reforms are occurring (or have already occurred) through the Rule 21 proceeding.
Moreover, D.20-09-035 in that proceeding directed IOUs to develop a temporary interconnection
pathway for V2G AC pilots. Since Commission approval of D.20-09-035, the IOUs have hosted
two workshops to solicit stakeholder feedback on such a pathway, and several of the Joint
Commenters have actively participated in these workshops. One key barrier identified in these
workshops is the fact that the IOU interconnection engineering staff has limited resources to
review V2G AC pilot projects proposals. To ensure that SB 676 leads to real-world progress on
interconnection standards, Joint Commenters recommend the Commission allow the IOUs
initiate an accelerated expansion program, which allows for cost recovery associated with
enhancing and training their interconnection engineering staff pool. This will help accommodate
the workload expansion attributable to expedited implementation of upcoming V2G pilots
resulting from D.20-09-035.
G. OP 5 should be revised to provide a pathway to marketing, education, and outreach
(“ME&O”) funds to ensure meaningful and lasting implementation
12 See, for example, VGI WG Recommendation 3.01, 3.03, 3.04, 3.05, 3.07, and 2.01. These barriers include those
related to metering requirements, the Wholesale Distribution Access Tariff for grid exports, Resource Adequacy
value for grid exports, and the Demand Response Auction Mechanism.
13 PD at 22.
8

Several VGI WG recommendations and party comments demonstrate support for ME&O
strategies to advance VGI.14 While OP 5 directs IOUs to identify education and outreach tactics
related to specific VGI strategies, Joint Commenters wonder whether merely asking IOUs to
identify strategies will lead to sufficient ME&O necessary to support VGI implementation and
expansion. Instead, Joint Commenters recommend OP 5 be revised to require identifying a
portion of future TE program ME&O budgets to educate customers about VGI opportunities. OP
5 should be revised per Joint Commenters’ redlines in Appendix A.
H. OP 6 should be revised to account for the role of automotive original equipment
manufacturers (“OEMs”)/EV service providers (“EVSPs”) in customer education and
evaluation concerning ALM systems and other VGI strategies
The PD does not detail the role of third-party providers in delivering ALM technologies and
other VGI strategies to customers, including critical customer ME&O activities, which third-
party providers may be particularly well-suited to provide. Notably, if IOUs were directed to
partner with OEMs/EVSPs, they would capitalize on the combined centuries of experience that
OEMs/EVSPs have in marketing and engaging directly with customers in a competitive
environment. In opening comments on the Draft TE Framework (“Draft TEF”), Southern
California Edison (“SCE”) included data highlighting that OEMs are overwhelmingly the
primary channel for customers seeking information on EVs, as well as the primary channel for
information on incentives. Furthermore, SCE’s findings state “most (94%) customers feel that
the automotive companies should be responsible for advertising related to EVs.”15 In addition,
the PD does not adequately acknowledge the beneficial role OEMs/EVSPs may be able to play
in collecting collect information on the load profiles for managed charging.16 If this information
is collected solely from utility meters, it could miss more granular data available from
EVSP/OEM sources that the IOUs could leverage. As such, Joint Commenters recommend OP 6
be revised per Appendix A redlines to meet customer needs and expectations for the third-party
providers role in ME&O as it relates to ALM and other VGI strategies.
14 VGI WG recommendation 1.10 and 9.03; VGI WG Final Report at 9; Joint Commenters comments at 13; UCS
comments at 12.
15 Southern California Edison Company’s (U 338-E) Opening Comments on Equity, VGI, and ME&O (Sections 6,
11.1, and 11.2) – Attachment A “Southern California Edison EV Awareness and Advertising Online Panel
Research” at 2-4.
16 PD at 54.
9

IV. KEY AREAS REQUIRING CLARIFICATION OR EXPANSION.
A. Criteria used to determine whether a strategy should be adopted pursuant to SB 676
excludes strategies that may provide significant net benefits to ratepayers
The PD adopts three strategies as VGI strategies pursuant to SB 676,17 declines to adopt two
VGI WG strategies as VGI strategies,18 and adopts the remaining six strategies as VGI strategies
not pursuant to SB 676.19 By and large, the Commission’s categorization of SB 676 and non-SB
676 strategies seems to hinge on an underdefined rubric which might address whether a
particular strategy is cost effective or not – as well as uncertainties in whether the strategy
robustly addresses feasibility criteria. For example, in its discussion of reforming retail rates, the
PD offers as justification that “reforming retail rates is feasible and low-cost with high potential
benefit, as demonstrated by the parties.”20 For both interconnection reform and non-
interconnection standards, the PD offers as justification the terms “low-cost” and “feasible,”
though it does not mention potential benefits.21 However, regarding discussion of EVs for bi-
directional non-grid export power the PD states, “due to the lack of data concerning cost-
effectiveness, it cannot be adopted as a SB 676 strategy at this time.”22 Joint Commenters are
concerned about this for two reasons: first, the Commission does not appear to acknowledge that
cost-effectiveness can be more comprehensive than economic savings. As has been discussed by
multiple signatories to these comments, adopting a measure of cost that does not attempt to
capture broader benefits, including societal benefits, is counterproductive and reductive, as it
may prematurely or unfairly classify certain strategies as not worth pursuing, despite having
valuable benefits under a more holistic accounting of benefits. Second, this approach may
prematurely and artificially limit VGI strategies that could be adopted pursuant to SB 676. For
some strategies, defensible data regarding costs, benefits and value are available and could be
17 (1) Reforming retail rates, (2) reform of interconnection rules, and (3) development, support and approval of non-
interconnection standards. See PD at 15, 22, and 23.
18 (1) enhance coordination and consistency between agencies and state goals, and (2) conduct other non-VGI
specific programs and activities to increase EV adoption. See PD at 24.
19 (1) Develop and fund government and load-serving entity customer programs, incentives, and Distributed Energy
Resource procurements. PD at 17; (2) Design wholesale market rules and access. PD at 18; (3) Pilots,
demonstrations, emerging technology, and studies. PD at 19; (4) Accelerate use of EVs for bi-directional non-grid
export power and PSPS resiliency and backup. PD at 20; (5) Marketing, Education, and outreach. PD at 23.
20 PD at 16.
21 PD at 22 and 23.
22 PD at 21.
10

used to assess the strategies through normal methods (e.g., Avoidable Cost Calculator and
California Air Resources Board’s CalEnviroScreen Tools). Meanwhile, for other strategies,
sharing information on costs remain a challenge for OEMs, which must comply with relevant
antitrust laws that prevent disclosure of cost information. In other cases, while costs are
quantifiable, the benefits are real and known, but difficult to quantify in the strategy’s infancy. In
any of these cases, it would be pre-mature to reject a VGI strategy solely on the basis of cost-
effectiveness, and the Joint Commenters recommend that any rejected strategies be re-evaluated
as part of either the third-party evaluation process or the annual reporting process outlined in the
PD. Moreover, if it is necessary to obtain cost data, the Joint Commenters recommend the third-
party evaluator work with industry to confidentially collect and anonymize any competitively
confidential cost information. Finally, the Commission’s evaluation criteria should be revised to
consider potential high-benefit opportunities – including, critically, where equity considerations
would be furthered – where evaluating cost-effectiveness is simply a matter of applying available
methods. Indeed, the Commission should consider pursuing likely high-benefit, high-value
strategies at scale, pursuant to SB 676, regardless of an arbitrary definition of cost or feasibility.
B. Several key terms are left undefined
The Joint Commenters note that some key terms within the PD remain undefined. This
includes the terms “cost-effectiveness”, “feasible”, and “beneficial.” As discussed briefly above,
many of the decisions on whether to pursue a strategy at scale or whether a strategy should be
pursued as a SB 676 strategy or not are predicated on undefined measures. For example, the
Commission states that “any strategies adopted by this decision pursuant to SB 676 must
maximize the use of “cost-effective” VGI, meaning that the strategies themselves need to be
shown to be cost-effective at the time of establishment. However, it is not clear that cost-
effective from the Commission’s perspective means anything more than driving down the cost of
electricity supply – while this is of course a key goal of SB 676, such a narrow definition gives
short shrift to broader ratepayer benefits, which the PD gives a nod to, but fails to explore more
comprehensively. As well, it is unclear whether feasibility is from the perspective of a VGI
service provider, the utility or the Commission – given that those entities might have vastly
different perceptions of what is possible, this is an important clarification. Joint Commenters
seek clarity on the definition of those terms.
11

C. The Commission should provide more detail on how adoption of Reform Retail Rates as
a VGI strategy interacts with the draft TEF
The PD adopts Reform Retail Rates as a VGI strategy pursuant to SB 676, and states “A
future Commission decision regarding the rates section 9.1 of the draft TEF (Electric Vehicle
Rate Evolution Plan Development Guidance) and / or other decisions may provide additional
direction regarding rate reforms applicable to EVs.” 23 Joint Commenters respectfully request
additional detail on how this element of the PD might interact with the draft TEF’s proposed EV
Rate Evolution Plan (“EV REV Plan”) concept.24 More specifically, Joint Commenters believe
more direction is needed as to whether utilities should start to pursue a reform of retail rates now
or wait for future clarification in a forthcoming decision, how this relates to existing proceedings
and efforts, including dynamic rates proposals under consideration in PG&E and SDG&E
General Rate Cases and PG&E’s commercial EV dynamic rate application, and when to expect a
decision on the EV REV plan concept.
D. Joint Commenters respectfully request clarification that non-interconnection technical
standards are adopted pursuant to SB 676
Section 5.7 of the PD discusses technical standards not related to interconnection. As written,
the discussion states:
“this decision finds that development of such standards should be a non-SB 676 VGI strategy
given that the development of new technology requires the adoption or revision of one or
more technical standards. Because the development, support and approval of non-
interconnection technical standards related to VGI services is generally low cost and is
feasible to pursue, this strategy is adopted by this decision as a VGI strategy pursuant to SB
676.”25
These successive sentences contradict each other. Joint Commenters respectfully request the
Commission revise the language in this discussion section to clarify that, indeed, non-
interconnection technical standards are adopted as a VGI strategy pursuant to SB 676 for the
reasons articulated.
E. Stakeholders would benefit from an Appendix that illustrates the overlapping timelines
stemming from the PD
23 PD at 16.
24 Draft TEF at Section 9.1.
25 PD at 23.
12

The PD orders a workshop, several Advice Letter filings, consultation with Energy Division
staff, and regular reporting requirements, all ranging from 30 days from adoption of the PD to
March 2031. Joint Commenters urge the Commission to include an Appendix to clearly illustrate
the many overlapping timelines to promote transparency and facilitate stakeholder engagement.
F. A focus on unique aspects of VGI opportunities for the MD/HD EV sector is still lacking
Joint Commenters support the expansion of the vehicle-grid integration definition to include
medium-, heavy-duty, and off-road vehicle and equipment. However, the Commission only
mentions larger vehicles twice, rather unconvincingly. First, they give consideration to
CALSTART’s argument that “deployment of VGI for medium and heavy-duty charging offers a
large opportunity to avoid distribution upgrades and…IOU TE program ‘make-ready’ costs”26 by
stating that electrical corporations are now required to “identify in annual VGI reporting
deployment the number of ALM technologies installed for any medium and heavy-duty
segment(s).”27 As well, the Commission says utilities must “consider” medium- and heavy-duty
vehicles for pilots28 and break out larger vehicles with respect to VGI metrics.29 However, these
actions do not adequately recognize the deep potential for VGI among larger commercial
vehicles. Given the larger battery of these vehicles and, for some vehicles like school buses, a
predictable duty cycle that lends itself to provision of grid services, commercial vehicles can be
an excellent focus for VGI efforts; as well, given the large power draw, it is even more important
to ensure that these vehicles are a benefit, rather than a burden to the grid. As such, the
Commission should require, not encourage, utilities to pursue VGI strategies that focus on
harnessing the VGI capabilities of larger vehicles.
V. CONCLUSION.
Joint Commenters appreciate the opportunity to submit these opening comments on the
PD concerning SB 676 implementation. We look forward to further collaboration with the
Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
26 Id. at 29.
27 Id.
28 Id. at 40.
29 Id. at 52.
13

Dated: December 3, 2020 Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Edward Burgess /s/ Ryan Harty
Edward Burgess Ryan Harty
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council American Honda Motor Co., Inc.
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400 1919 Torrance Blvd.
Berkeley, CA 94704 Torrance, CA 90501
Tel: (510) 665-7811 Tel: (310) 783-3962
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org Email: Ryan.Harty@ahm.honda.com
/s/ Marc Monbouquette /s/ Matt Stanberry
Marc Monbouquette Matt Stanberry
Enel X North America, Inc. Advanced Energy Economy
846 Bransten Road 1000 Vermont Ave. NW, 3rd Floor,
San Carlos, CA 94070 Washington, D.C. 20005
Tel: (415) 488-6035 Tel: (202) 380-1950
Email: marc.monbouquette@enel.com Email: mstanberry@aee.net
/s/ Jin Noh /s/ Larissa Koehler
Jin Noh Larissa Koehler
California Energy Storage Alliance Environmental Defense Fund
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400 123 Mission Street, 28th Floor
Berkeley, CA 94704 San Francisco, CA 94105
Tel: (510) 665 7811 Tel: (415) 293-6093
Email: cesa_regulatory@storagealliance.org Email: lkoehler@edf.org
/s/ Megha Lakhchaura /s/ Thomas Ashley
Megha Lakhchaura Thomas Ashley
EVBox, North America Greenlots
1930 Innovation Way, Suite 200 767 S. Alameda St, Suite 200
Libertyville, IL 60048 Los Angeles, CA 90021
Tel: (310) 309-7775 Tel: (802) 922-5585
Email: megha.lakhchaura@evbox.com Email: tom@greenlots.com
/s/ Miles Muller /s/ Chris King
Miles Muller Chris King
Natural Resources Defense Council Siemens
111 Sutter Street, 21st Floor 721 Shell Blvd, Suite 205
San Francisco, CA 94104 Foster City, CA 94404
Tel: (415) 875-8254 Tel: (510) 435 5189
Email: mmuller@nrdc.org Email: chris_king@siemens.com
14

Appendix A
Recommended Redlines
PD PROPOSED DECISION CONCERNING IMPLEMENTATION OF SENATE
Title BILL 676 AND VEHICLE-TO-GRID VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION
STRATEGIES
Finding ALM has the potential to vary the charging of grid-connected EVs in a way that
of Fact optimizes grid performance and maximizes ratepayer benefits by avoiding upgrades
13: to customer-side, secondary, and primary distribution system infrastructure.
OP Redline / Reference to Above Joint Comments
1 …efforts to collaborate with the California Independent System Operator to design
wholesale market rules and access that support VGI as defined by this decision;
efforts within Commission jurisdiction and IOU capabilities to facilitate wholesale
market participation and access that advances VGI strategies in coordination with
reforms underway at the California Independent System Operator.
3 Southern California Edison Company, San Diego Gas & Electric Company, and
Pacific Gas and Electric Company shall each: -
collaborate with the California Independent System Operator to design
wholesale market rules and access that support Vehicle Grid Integration as
defined by this decision;
as part of its annual and midterm reporting on VGI activities, the IOUs shall seek
input from the CAISO and use any input received to provide a joint status report
on collaboration activities
4 Southern California Edison Company, San Diego Gas & Electric Company, and
Pacific Gas and Electric Company shall, each, in all of its future applications for
transportation electrification (TE) programs, tariffs for utility-side distribution
infrastructure for separately metered electric vehicle charging installations pursuant
to AB 841 (Ting, 2020), and including any other rule or tariff to support TE
infrastructure installation:
propose how it will incentivize and deploy customer-side Automated Load
Management (ALM) technology at host sites where this technology will to support
TE installation at equal or lesser costs than hardware-based electrical capacity for
existing and new utility electrical service, and in a manner that yields net ratepayer
benefits;
describe its standard evaluation criteria to determine host sites where ALM would
reduce infrastructure costs and benefit ratepayers by reducing costs utilizing
existing utility electrical service as much as practical and feasible while meeting host
site needs for electric vehicle charging;
5 identify strategies for educating host site customers on the benefits of 1) voluntarily
passing time-of-use rate signals to electric vehicle drivers and, 2) participating in
i

any demand response program(s) for which the host site customers are eligible;
identify how it will establish outreach materials and load management tactics to
reduce any grid impacts from host site customers that opt out of a default agreement
to pass on time-of-use pricing; include in all future TE plans a detailed description
of how the portion of ME&O budget allocated to the above activities will be used,
and identification of opportunities to partner with market participants to strengthen
IOU ME&O activities or meet gaps in IOU ME&O activities
6 Southern California Edison Company, San Diego Gas & Electric Company, and
Pacific Gas and Electric Company shall each partner with OEMs and EVSPs to
provide customer education and evaluate effectiveness of these in achieving and
sustaining customer acceptance once wherever these Automated Load Management
systems are installed.
8 Southern California Edison Company, San Diego Gas & Electric Company, and
Pacific Gas and Electric Company shall jointly host a workshop in the first quarter
of 2021 to educate potential solicit feedback from Vehicle Grid Integration (VGI)
demand response providers and other interested stakeholders on demand response
opportunities and identify any barriers to participation for VGI resources and
strategies to overcome barriers… Southern California Edison Company, San Diego
Gas & Electric Company, and Pacific Gas and Electric Company shall jointly serve
to the service list of this proceeding and the service list for Application 17-01-012 a
post-workshop report within 30 days of the workshop that identifies any barriers to
VGI participation in demand response programs, or any other programs such as bids
for resource adequacy services to be delivered in 2022 per Decision 19-07-009. The
utilities shall also request approval for a plan to overcome or partially alleviate each
DR barrier in pursuit of facilitating 200 MW combined of VGI in next DR cycle
portfolio and bids for resource adequacy services to be delivered per Decision 19-
07-009.
11 See Section II.D / Page 6 above
ii