BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA FILED
01/13/20
04:59 PM
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Consider
Streamlining Interconnection of Distributed
Rulemaking 17-07-007
Energy Resources and Improvements to
(Filed July 13, 2017)
Rule 21.
REPLY COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON
VEHICLE TO GRID ALTERNATING CURRENT INTERCONNECTION SUBGROUP
REPORT
Edward Burgess
Policy Director
Zach Woogen
Senior Analyst
VEHICLE-GRIDINTEGRATIONCOUNCIL
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400
Berkeley, California 94704
Telephone: (941)266-0017
Email: eburgess@vgicouncil.org
Dated: January 13, 2020
1 / 6

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Consider
Rulemaking 17-07-007
Streamlining Interconnection of Distributed
(Filed July 13, 2017)
Energy Resources and Improvements to Rule 21.
REPLY COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON
VEHICLE TO GRID ALTERNATING CURRENT INTERCONNECTION SUBGROUP
REPORT
In accordance with Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”)1hereby submits
its reply to comments on the Vehicle-to-Grid Alternating Current (“V2G AC”) Interconnection
Technical Sub-Group Final Report (“Final Report”) submitted in Rulemakings 17-07-007 and R.
18-12-006 on January 6, 2020. Pursuant to Joint Administrative Law Judges’ Ruling Establishing
Subgroup and Schedule to Develop Proposal on Mobile Inverter Technical Requirements for
Rule 21 and Noticing Workshop, issued by Administrative Law Judges Kelly A. Hymes, Sasha
Goldberg, and Patrick Doherty on August 23, 2019, VGIC timely files these reply comments on
January 13, 2020 in R. 17-07-007 and R. 18-12-006. VGIC also previously filed a motion for
party status in these proceedings on January 6, 2020.
I. INTRODUCTION
1VGIC membercompaniesand supportersincludeAmerican Honda Motor Co.,Inc.,Enel XNorth America, Inc.,
Fiat Chrysler Automobiles,Ford Motor Company,General Motors Company,and Nuvve Corporation.The views
expressed in these Comments are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all of the individual
VGICmember companiesorsupporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/).
1
2 / 6

VGIC is a 501(c)6 membership-based advocacy group committed to advancing the role
of electric vehicles (“EVs”) and vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”)through policy development,
education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to a decarbonized transportation
and electric sector by ensuring the value from EV deployments and flexible EV charging and
discharging is recognized and compensated in support of achieving a more reliable, affordable,
and efficient electric grid. VGIC appreciates the opportunity to participate in this proceeding to
inform and shape the development of a pathway to V2G AC interconnection.
II. REPLY COMMENTS
Reply to the California Energy Storage Alliance’s (CESA)Comments:
VGIC generally supports CESA’s comments and provides the following additional response:
 VGIC is supportive of CESA’s concept of an “initial phase” of V2G interconnections that
could be pursued under UL 9741 pathway. This pathway was also described in VGIC’s
initial comments submitted on January 6, 2020. However, VGIC cautions that pursuing such
a pathway in the near-term should not foreclose other interconnection pathways from being
pursued over the long-term, including pathways that do not require any third-party testing
procedures and could instead utilize OEM internal testing procedures.
 VGIC is supportive of CESA’s recommendation to reconvenethe subgroup once updates to
the necessary standards (e.g. SAE J3072, UL 9741) have been completed. VGIC believes
these updates will coincide with the suggested July 2020 timeframe as discussed in the
December 17, 2019 workshop. However, VGIC is open to some flexibility in the exact date
ofreconvening the subgroup if there are unforeseen delays in completing updates to the
2
3 / 6

necessary standards. VGIC also agrees with CESA that reconvening the subgroup should not
be contingent on the availability of EV test results.
 VGIC also supports CESA’s recommendation for the Commission to consider the
jurisdictional questions regarding internal certification through the OEM testing procedures.
In its initial comments, VGIC outlines several potential pathways for how this might work to
satisfy CPUC and IOU needs. For example, one option may be to rely upon governmental
entities such as the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (“NHTSA”). To that
end, VGIC offers to work with stakeholders over next several months to provide more detail
on how NHTSA’s procedures could work in support of a potential pathway for internal
testing.
Reply to Southern California Edison’s (SCE)Comments:
VGIC offers the following comments in response to SCE’s initial comments:
 VGIC generally supports SCE’s conceptual timeline outlined on page2 of its comments.
However, VGIC believes the timeline could be accelerated and recommends that the end
point for the “initial phase” of V2G AC Implementation could occur as early as the mid-2021
timeframe (rather than early 2022).
 VGIC opposes SCE’s requirement for third-party testing. VGIC recognizes that third-party
testing could be an option if pursued through UL 9741 as described in the Final Report,
however this should be seen only as one possible pathway rather than an absolute
requirement. VGIC agrees with SCE that eliminating safety risk is paramount and that third-
party certification has been a successful way to achieve this for other grid-connected devices
in the past. However, this approach is not feasible for automobiles, which are subject to a
3
4 / 6

morecomplex and sophisticated manufacturing environment2. Furthermore, VGIC believes
the requirement to use third-party testing is a restrictive approach that undervalues and
misunderstands the rigor already involved in automotive grade testing. For example, section
7-D-1 ofthe Final Report details the following aspects of how internal testing currently
operates:
“OEMs will validate their product to ensure they can achieve the relevant certification
o
by meeting all FMVSS, EPA, and other standards and requirements. This self-
certification step is typically a continual, 18-month process spanning from the design
freeze until the beginning of production.” 3
“The magnitude of effort, internal support resources, and test facilities to perform
o
validation and revalidation is significant, as this process occurs as frequently as each
month during the product development cycle.” 4
The ability to develop and fully test products internally is also critical to advancing products
over a short development cycle, and to ensure the security of competitive information during
product development. Given these factors, VGIC continues to support OEM internal testing
as a potential pathway for validating the safety and security of interconnected V2G
equipment. This could include accreditation of OEMs as a Nationally Recognized Testing
Laboratory (“NRTL”)as suggested by VGIC in its initial comments and by the joint
comments of SDG&E and PG&E.
2VGIC agrees with CESA’s statement on page 9 of theirinitialcommentsthat“mobile inverters are wholly
integrated into the software, firmware, and hardwareof thevehicle, which may play many different functions
beyond those for smart inverters.”
3Final Report, p 45
4Final Report p 46
4
5 / 6

Reply to the Joint Comments of San Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E)and Pacific Gas and
Electric’s (PG&E)
VGIC offers the following comments in response to SDG&E and PG&E’s joint initial
comments:
 VGIC opposes SDG&E and PG&E’s recommendation for requiring EV test results for UL
1741 prior to reconvening the subgroup. Such “pre-qualification” testing would require the
OEMs to incur significant expenditures to prepare application-specific test equipment and
develop new software, firmware and hardware to meet test specifications, some of which
may only apply to off-board/stationary equipment that is not applicable to PEVs. Since this
testing would not be directly linked to an interconnection pathway, such an approach would
only be practical if there were an external source of funding available to all OEMs to support
this activity.
 VGIC supports SDG&E and PG&E’s concept of a potential interconnection pathway
whereby OEMs become accredited as a NRTL for EV testing. This is very similar to several
of the pathways presented in VGIC’s initial comments, including number 2 (see page 5 of
VGIC initial comments) and number 5 (see page 6 of VGIC initial comments).
Respectfullysubmitted,
Edward Burgess
Policy Director
VEHICLEGRIDINTEGRATIONCOUNCIL
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400
Berkeley, California 94704
Telephone: (941)266-0017
Email: eburgess@vgicouncil.org
Date: January 13, 2020
5
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
6 / 6