BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA FILED
01/06/20
04:59 PM
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Consider
Streamlining Interconnection of Distributed
Rulemaking 17-07-007
Energy Resources and Improvements to
(Filed July 13, 2017)
Rule 21.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON VEHICLE TO
GRID ALTERNATING CURRENT INTERCONNECTION SUBGROUP REPORT
Edward Burgess
Policy Director
Zach Woogen
Senior Analyst
VEHICLE-GRIDINTEGRATIONCOUNCIL
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400
Berkeley, California 94704
Telephone: (941)266-0017
Email: eburgess@vgicouncil.org
Dated: January 6, 2020
1 / 8

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Consider
Rulemaking 17-07-007
Streamlining Interconnection of Distributed
(Filed July 13, 2017)
Energy Resources and Improvements to Rule 21.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON VEHICLE TO
GRID ALTERNATING CURRENT INTERCONNECTION SUBGROUP REPORT
In accordance with Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”)1hereby submits
comments on the Vehicle-to-Grid (“V2G AC”) Interconnection Technical Sub-Group Final
Report (“Final Report”)submitted in Rulemakings 17-07-007 and R. 18-12-006 on December
11, 2019. Pursuant to Joint Administrative Law Judges’ Ruling Establishing Subgroup and
Schedule to Develop Proposal on Mobile Inverter Technical Requirements for Rule 21 and
Noticing Workshop, issued by Administrative Law Judges Kelly A. Hymes, Sasha Goldberg, and
Patrick Doherty on August 23, 2019, VGIC timely files these comments on January 6, 2020 in R.
17-07-007 and 18-12-006. VGIC also previously filed a motion for party status in these
proceedings on January 6, 2020.
1VGIC membercompaniesand supportersincludeAmerican Honda Motor Co., Inc.,Enel XNorth America, Inc.,
Fiat Chrysler Automobiles,Ford Motor Company,General Motors Company,and Nuvve Corporation.The views
expressed in these Comments are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all of the individual
VGIC member companiesorsupporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/).
1
2 / 8

I. INTRODUCTION
VGIC is a 501(c)6 membership-based advocacy group committed to advancing the role
of electric vehicles (“EVs”)and vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”)through policy development,
education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to a decarbonized transportation
and electric sector by ensuring the value from EV deployments and flexible EV charging and
discharging is recognized and compensated in support of achieving a more reliable, affordable,
and efficient electric grid. VGIC appreciates the opportunity to participate in this proceeding to
inform and shape the development of a pathway to V2G AC interconnection.
II. COMMENTS
VGIC commends the considerable effort made by stakeholders that contributed to the
timely drafting ofthe Final Report submitted on December 11, 2019. In particular, the VGIC
would like to thank the authors for including several items that reflect the input and perspective
of the automotive manufacturers (“OEMs”), several of which are VGIC members.
VGIC believes this Final Report represents a significant step forward in establishing a
clear pathway for V2GAC interconnection under the Rule 21 tariff, and ultimately towards
greater provision of grid services from plug-in electric vehicles, (“PEVs”) and increased PEV
adoption. As the Commission weighs next steps, VGIC has specific comments regarding each of
the two Recommendations included in the Final Report, which are detailed below.
A. Comments on Recommendation 1: Pre-conditions for Reconvening Subgroup
Consistent with Recommendation 1 of the Final Report, VGIC supports reconvening the
subgroup in the July 2020 timeframe. During the December 17, 2019 subgroup workshop, there
2
3 / 8

appeared to be general consensus that a one-day workshop in July 2020 would be an appropriate
path forward as a way to maintain the subgroup’s momentum, without prematurely
overcommitting resources to the process. VGIC supports this approach, as it would also allow
sufficient time for further development of relevant SAE, UL, and IEEE standards, as outlined in
Section 7A and 7B of the Final Report. VGIC members are actively involved in pursuing these
updates and believe that this proposed timeline is appropriate. VGIC also agrees with Staff’s
suggestion that it may be helpful to identify a list of tasks that are expected to be accomplished
prior to the July 2020 workshop. At a minimum, this list of tasks should include the identified
updates to SAE J3072 and UL 9741. It could also include further actions surrounding pathways
forOEM internal testing validation procedures (i.e., “self-certification”).
While additional time to accomplish these tasks is appropriate, it is important that action
on V2G AC interconnection be resumed quickly. Meaningful progress on the development of
V2G AC interconnection pathways has been impeded by the misconceived notion that policies to
enable the interconnection of V2G AC systems are not yet needed because industry stakeholders
arenot developing products or services requiring such policies. During the December 17, 2019
workshop, some stakeholders specifically addressed this and raised questions over whether the
OEMs’ current product plans include full V2G services, and, if so, in what time frame. VGIC
can confirm that at least some OEMs have tested operational V2G AC demonstration vehicles,
and some have product plans that include full V2G services within a five year time horizon. Any
further delay to the development of interconnection pathways for V2G AC systems may
unnecessarily hinder such plans. The Commission and this subgroup have built important
momentum towards developing a well-defined interconnection pathway that can signal to OEMs
that they should continue their product plans for V2G AC systems. As such, VGIC asserts that
3
4 / 8

continued action within this subgroup is required and aligns with the PEV industry stakeholders’
proposal to reconvene work in mid-2020. The mid-2020 reconvening is necessary to ensure that
final Rule 21 tariff language can be adopted within the next fewyears, and match OEMs’
product development targets.
B. Comments on Recommendation 2: Consider Jurisdictional QuestionsRegarding
OEM Internal Testing
OEMs, including VGIC members, have expressed general concerns about the practicality of
meeting third-party, testing requirements (i.e., performed by a Nationally-Recognized Testing
Laboratory [“NRTL”]) for on-board inverters including both UL 1741 and a forthcoming IEEE
1547.1-2020. As described in the Final Report, such practices, which may be the norm for
stationary solar PV inverters, are not a good fit for the OEM manufacturing process and vehicle
development cycle. OEMs generally apply extremely rigorous testing procedures for meeting
vehicle safety and product reliability standards; however, these are typically conducted through
internal procedures. Requiring third-party testing on a regular basis would place immense
administrative and logistical burdens on all parties and act as a barrier to V2G market
development. VGIC believes that the Final Report adequately expresses OEM norms around
internal testing and effectively describes the nuances of the dynamic, competitive automotive
industry. Despite these concerns, OEMs are committed to ensuring grid safety and reliability for
interconnected vehicles and developing methods that communicate compliance to adopted
standards. Moreover, VGIC recognizes that the Commission and investor-owned utilities
(“IOUs”)would like to understand possible mechanisms to review and approve validation results
from OEM internal testing procedures as a means to ensure grid safety and reliability for
interconnecting V2G AC devices. The VGIC has considered several potential pathways and
4
5 / 8

practices that might behelpful in this regard, as reviewed below. Note that these ideas are still
evolving and should not be interpreted as formal recommendations from any VGIC member
company. Additional stakeholder discussion is needed for each.
1. CPUCValidation Process: Stakeholders could collaborate to establish a method that
allows the Commission to obtain “validation certificates” which confirm compliance
with the robust protocols executed by the OEMs in their adherence to SAE and other
relevant internal testing protocols.
2. Federal Validation Process: In lieu of the CPUC serving as a validation entity, this
task could also be performed by a Federal entity. This concept was discussed at the
December 17, 2019 workshop and VGIC has begun exploring solutions to the
interconnection standards issues at the Federal level. The National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration (“NHTSA”) audits complete vehicles to ensure OEMs have
met Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (“FMVSS”). An interim step could be
taken prior to the July 2020 update to explore the possibility of adding V2G
interconnection standards to NHTSA’s scope through the FMVSS process. VGIC
also notes that this sort of process could potentially establish a national framework for
V2G interconnection that would help provide consistency in markets outside of
California. The December 17, 2019 workshop also included questions on whether the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (“FERC”)is a candidate for Federal
validation, though VGIC believes FERC is likely not well-equipped to serve this role
at present.
3. IOU Uniform Data Request: Another option entails an IOUrequesting to review
relevant datasets and/or test reports from the OEMs’internal testing process. Several
5
6 / 8

OEMs retain robust records from all vehicle testing. However, this information is
generally kept confidential. It may be appropriate for a uniform request to be made to
all OEMs detailing how to confidentially and securely provide this information to
IOUs for purposes of certifying compliance with applicable V2G AC interconnection
standards. It may be appropriate for the Commission to have arolein shaping this
type of request, such that it is amenable to both the IOUs and OEMs needs.
4. UL 9741 as theRelevant Third-Party Standard: While UL 9741 is not yet a
published standard for V2G AC-capable EVSE, there was wide acknowledgement in
the Final Report and at the December 17, 2019 workshop that it could readily be
developed forthe purposes of interconnecting V2G AC systems. The further
development and subsequent release of UL 9741 could adequately address both the
IOUs’grid safety requirements and the OEMs’ issues with third-party certification.
Under a future where UL 9741 serves as a standard for bi-directional EVSE (either
for off-board or split inverter configurations), IOUs can certify the stationary V2G
AC EVSE through a third-party NRTL and OEMs can continue their robust internal
testing protocols for their vehicles. VGIC recommends that the Commission indicate
directly to UL that it should begin the development process for UL 9741 prior to the
July 2020 update. The concurrent timing of SAE J3072 and UL 9741 revisions will
allow OEMs’ design and engineering teams to continue apace with V2G AC product
development and deployment.
5. OEMs as a NRTL: Apossibility someOEMs could explore is pursuing certification
as aNRTL. Testing labs operated internally by many OEMs have similar test
equipment, calibration requirements, and qualification protocols as NRTLs. As such,
6
7 / 8

some OEMs may be able to provide data output and test results that areconsistent
with the approach offered by NRTLs. There is someprecedent for this approach, and
OEMs have had certification approved for specific subsets of tests through
collaborations with federal agencies and research labs.
VGIC would like to emphasize that these options represent a limited subset of potential paths
forward. VGIC would like to continue discussion on these options as well as explore other
options not listed above.
III. CONCLUSION
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit thesecomments in response to the Final
Report and the December 17, 2019 workshop. We look forward to further collaboration with the
Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfullysubmitted,
Edward Burgess
Policy Director
VEHICLE-GRIDINTEGRATIONCOUNCIL
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400
Berkeley, California 94704
Telephone: (941)266-0017
Email: eburgess@vgicouncil.org
Date: January 6, 2020
7
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
8 / 8