BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Continue
Rulemaking 18-12-006
the Development of Rates and
(Filed December 13, 2018)
Infrastructure for Vehicle Electrification.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE
TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION FRAMEWORK (SECTION 9, 10, AND 12)
Edward Burgess
Policy Director
Zach Woogen
Senior Analyst
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400
Berkeley, California 94704
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
Dated: September 11, 2020

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Continue the
Rulemaking 18-12-006
Development of Rates and Infrastructure for
(Filed December 13, 2018)
Vehicle Electrification.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE
TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION FRAMEWORK (SECTION 9, 10, AND 12)
In accordance with Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council1 (“VGIC”) hereby submits
these comments on the Administrative Law Judge’s Ruling Adding Staff Proposal for a Draft
Transportation Electrification Framework to the Record and Inviting Party Comments
(“Ruling”) issued by Administrative Law Judge (“ALJ”) Patrick Doherty on February 3, 2020.
Pursuant to Email Ruling Resetting Procedural Schedule for Comments on Transportation
Electrification Framework Sections issued by ALJ Sasha Goldberg on August 4, 2020, VGIC
timely files these comments on Section 9, 10, and 12 of the Draft Transportation Electrification
Framework (“Draft TEF”) on September 11, 2020.
I. INTRODUCTION.
A. Overview of VGIC
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., Connect California
LLC, Enel X North America, Inc., Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, Ford Motor Company, General Motors
Company, Nissan North America, Inc., Nuvve Corporation, and Toyota Motor North America, Inc. The
views expressed in these Comments are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all of
the individual VGIC member companies or supporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/).
2

VGIC is a 501(c)6 membership-based advocacy group committed to advancing the role
of electric vehicles (“EVs”) and vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”) through policy development,
education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to decarbonized transportation
and electric sectors by ensuring the multidimensional value from EV adoption and flexible EV
charging and discharging is recognized and compensated in support of achieving a more reliable,
affordable, and efficient electric grid.
B. Organization of VGIC’s Comments
VGIC’s comments are organized as follows:
 First, VGIC provides several general observations and recommendations on
Transportation Electrification and Customer Rates for the Commission’s
consideration.
 Second, VGIC addresses specific questions on Sections 9 and 10 of the Draft TEF
posed by the Commission and in Energy Division Staff Paper on VGI Issues.2
II. OVERARCHING OBSERVATIONS REGARDING EV CUSTOMER RATES
VGIC responds to the Commission’s specific questions on TEF Section 9 in Section III of our
comments below. However at the outset we would like to make a few general observations about
the role of rates in promoting VGI and TE overall.
 Rate design can be an effective tool to help accelerate TE overall and VGI in
particular.
VGIC believes that EV rate design can be leveraged to accelerate EV and EVSE
production by enabling VGI as a means of a) lowering the total cost of EV ownership, b)
providing a revenue to OEMs and EVSPs for administering certain rate programs, rebates
2 Vehicle Grid Integration Implementation and the Draft Transportation Electrification Framework,
Energy Division Staff Paper (August 10, 2020)
3

or load management schemes, and c) assuring that vehicles remain connected to allow for
automated dispatch in support of VGI goals.
 Increasingly dynamic rate options are generally more favorable for VGI:
VGIC generally supports increased use of dynamic rates, which we believe can
ultimately be accomplished in a variety of ways (some of which are not mutually
exclusive) including the following:
o Real-time options including 1) direct wholesale market participation, 2) indirect
wholesale price exposure (e.g. like SDG&E’s Power Your Drive program)
o Enhanced TOU options, including, 1) Increased CPP options with tiered
structures for competitive kW pricing, 2) Increased on/off peak price differentials.
o Extension of dynamic rate concepts above to distribution system costs.
 In designing EV rates, consideration should be given to the fact that EV adoption
generally provides to downward pressure on rates.
VGIC notes that EVs contrasts with other forms of DER (e.g. rooftop solar) that typically
lead to lower volumetric sales, thereby putting upward pressure on rates. As such, we
believe there should be less emphasis or concern about potential cross-subsidies within
EV rates, and more emphasis on exploring EV rate design as a means to further TE
policy objectives and introduce new business opportunities for EV industry participants
and vehicle owners.
 Advanced rate options can be implemented without the need for new direct
metering equipment
4

Implementing advanced rate or bill credit options can be achieved without resorting to
expensive new metering infrastructure that will likely deter customer participation.
Instead, interval data can be more cost effectively be provided through EVSE
submetering or advanced OEM telematics. These approaches have been proposed in other
jurisdictions as a means for calculating bill credits. Additionally, if OEMs’ or EVSPs’
capabilities are leveraged to provide this data and recruit customers to perform grid-
beneficial behavior, VGIC believes they should be appropriately compensated for doing
so.
III. COMMENTS ON DRAFT TEF SECTION 9 (TRANSPORTATION
ELECTRIFICATION AND CUSTOMER RATES) AND STAFF PAPER ON VGI
ISSUES.
A. Section 9, Question 1: To what extent should investor-owned utilities (IOU)
collaborate on rate designs and related customer education efforts across service
territories? Could one IOUs take the lead in providing guidance on future electric
vehicle (EV) rate design plans or should each IOU file separate plans that comply
with the guidance described below?
VGIC commends the Commission and IOUs for their commitment to improving the EV rate
design process, and we offer several specific recommendations in response to this question. First,
VGIC recommends the Commission allow pathways for IOUs within California to replicate
successful rate options on an expedited basis. For example, if a rate has been successfully
implemented by one IOU, another IOU should be able to replicate is on an expedited basis. This
can facilitate further standardization across IOU service territories, and is a necessary step to
maintain momentum in implementing successful EV rates on a statewide basis. Second, VGIC
strongly encourages the Commission to issue guidance that maximizes the level of IOU
5

coordination on customer education efforts related to rates. It is imperative that a coordinated
approach to marketing, education, and outreach (“ME&O”) related to rates be implemented not
only across IOUs, but also in close collaboration with EV original equipment manufacturers
(“OEMs”), EVSE OEMs, and EV service providers (“EVSP”), given the opportunity to leverage
the unique and strong position of these competitive customer-facing market actors.3 VGIC
addresses this potential in greater detail in its Comments and Reply Comments on the TEF VGI
Section, which discusses the potential for “upstream” incentives for customer recruitment and
retention.
B. Section 9, Question 2: What aspects of rate design and related outreach are most
important to improve the customer experience and advance widespread
transportation electrification?
As an initial matter, VGIC commends the PUC, the IOUs, and other California stakeholders for
the significant progress that has been made in recent years on improving rate design for EV
customers. In many respects, California is the most advanced state in the U.S. in terms of the
variety and sophistication of EV retail rate options. However, that does not mean that there is no
room for improvement, nor does it mean that current rate options are sufficient to support
California’s ambitious transportation electrification goals. VGIC sees three main aspects of rate
design that could be improved to advance widespread transportation electrification:
1. Create more widely available dynamic EV rate options and/or improve the non-dynamic
components of existing EV rate options
2. Offer discount rate options for advanced/automated load management
3 See Comments of VGIC on TEF VGI and ME&O and Reply Comments of VGIC on TEF VGI and ME&O for
detailed recommendations.
6

3. Offer rate or bill credits to encourage and compensate customers for the value of energy
exported to the grid from vehicles
We describe each of these below in greater detail.
1. As part of the TEF, the PUC should direct IOUs to create more widely available
dynamic EV rate options and/or improve the non-dynamic components of existing EV
rate options
VGIC and many other parties have identified TOU rates as one of the core components of
encouraging robust managed charging and ultimately providing value to V2G functionality if
appropriate retail rate credits are provided to exported energy. Additionally, VGIC recognizes
that California is generally a leader in developing advanced TOU rates for electric vehicles.
However, VGIC notes that even the advanced TOU rates that exist in California today are still
only a partial solution for encouraging managed charging and other VGI functionality that is
dependent on dynamic rates. For example, we observe the following regarding to the IOUs’
current or proposed commercial EV rate options:
 PG&E’s subscription rate concept is essentially a flat monthly charge, which gives
customers little-to-no control over minimizing day to day charging costs other than
avoiding overage charges.4
 SCE’s current commercial EV rates include a demand charge holiday, however as
these demand charges are restored in 2024, they will return to a non-dynamic rate
structure that will remain a barrier to EV adoption.
4 While the subscription level could theoretically be reset on a periodic basis, this does not provide a level of
dynamic pricing incentives that would affect day-to-day charging decisions.
7

 SDG&E’s Power Your Drive rate, while perhaps the most dynamic retail rate option
in California, also includes a static “Base Rate” component of $0.14/kWh. Moreover,
this option is limited to only a small pool of eligible participants.
Given these limitations, we believe it is important to establish a framework to continuously
evaluate and improve upon dynamic rate offerings. The Electric Vehicle Rate Evolution
(EVREV) plan approach outlined in the Draft TEF could be one avenue for this. Additionally, in
its August 17, 2020 comments VGIC and other joint stakeholders proposed a VGI Portfolio
approach that could also be a venue for holistically evaluating EV rate options.
In each of the three rate examples outlined above, VGIC believes that even more
dynamic rate options can and should be considered, and should also made available to all
commercial EV customers, and as an option for residential customers. To do so, VGIC believes
the dynamic elements of these rates could also be extended to the portion of distribution system
costs associated with the subscription charge (PG&E), demand charge (SCE), or base rate
(SDG&E) components.5 Temporarily setting aside the commodity portion of rates (which are
addressed further below), below are some conceptual approaches for how these currently non-
dynamic components could be made more dynamic:
Dynamic Distribution Rate Approaches
 Approach 1 - Enhanced Volumetric TOU:
This approach would simply convert each non-dynamic rate components to a volumetric
TOU rate. This is similar to how SCE is currently operating under its present demand
charge holiday (in SCE’s case, this would depend upon the holiday being extended,
5 VGIC notes that SDG&E’s dynamic rate option does have a distribution adder component, but that it is limited to
200 hours per year, rather than being reflected in all hours.
8

and/or the volumetric components being updated). In many respects this would
approximate a coincident demand charge, in lieu of the traditional non-coincident
demand charge. An adaptive framework could also be used to update the TOU time
periods on a more frequent and regular basis as the needs of the grid evolve. These
frequent updates would match the capabilities of EV Fleet owners to actively manage
charging load, which may contrast with a typical residential customer. To the extent that
OEMs or EVSPs can serve as an intermediary for managing charging load, residential
customers could also increasingly be exposed to these frequent updates. OEMs and
EVSPs can help customers adapt to new EV TOU rate windows “behind the scenes”
while minimizing customer confusion.
 Approach 2 - Partially Dynamic Demand Charge:
VGIC views this approach as “second best” alternative to a volumetric TOU (or fully
dynamic rate), would be a more dynamic demand charge could be considered in lieu of
traditional demand charge approaches.6 Traditional demand charges typically do not
work well for EV customers because they penalize customers for a single hour of high
demand, even if that hour is not peak coincident, and even if their overall charging
behavior over the course of a month is generally aligned with the needs of the grid.
Moreover, if a customer records a high demand early in the month, there is little-to-no
incentive to optimize charging behavior for the rest of the month. Instead, it should be
possible to design a demand rate that is more flexible and dynamic, which would
encourage customers to charge in an optimal manner on every day during the month,
6 Note that this approach could also be used for facility-specific, or non-coincident secondary distribution system
costs for which a TOU rate may not be appropriate. Additionally, this is applicable only if demand charge holidays
are phased out as planned (VGIC may support continuation of current demand charge holidays).
9

while still reflecting the principles of cost causation. One approach might be an “average
of daily maximum demand” whereby the billing determinant is based on the average of
daily maximum demand values (versus a single monthly maximum value). This would
give customers a clear incentive to optimize charging behavior by reducing demand every
single day, and receive a commensurate benefit for doing so. The chart below illustrates
the concept for a hypothetical commercial customer. This option could also be further
enhanced by allowing for aggregating (or submetering) of charging stations in similar
locations on the primary distribution system to take advantage of load diversity (while
recognizing that this may not be feasible for customer-specific facilities, or secondary
distribution costs).
Dynamic Commodity Charges
Under either of the two approaches outlined above, or for any other approach, VGIC
recommends evolving the commodity portion of EV rates towards a fully dynamic or “real-time”
10

option. This could be through a similar approach to SDG&E’s Power Your Drive Program, but
offered to all EV customers, including residential customers, instead of only a small subset. For
residential customers, VGIC further recommends that vehicle telematics and EVSE submetering
could be used as a means of recording real-time charging behavior in lieu of expensive new
metering equipment that is likely to present a major barrier to adoption.
2. As part of the TEF, the PUC should direct IOUs to offer discounted rate options
for Active/Automated Load Management (“ALM”)
As discussed in VGIC’s Reply Comments on TEF Sections 7 and 8, an Automated/Active Load
Management (“ALM”) approach could help to defer distribution system upgrades required for
new charging equipment and/or overall EV load.7 The entities responsible for implementing
these load management actions (e.g. EV owners, OEMs, EVSPs, etc.) should be provided
corresponding compensation for avoiding these costs that benefit all ratepayers. In the case
where the ALM provider is also the retail customer this compensation could be offered in the
form of a retail rate discount or bill credit. For example, as detailed in the Reply Comments
referenced above, a discount of $0.14/kWh could be applied to a hypothetical ALM system that
helped to avoid $2,800 in distribution system upgrades or make-ready improvements.8 Since
these discounts are intended to capture marginal distribution system costs, they could be applied
under any of the Dynamic Distribution Rate options described above. Alternatively, the
compensation could be provided as a direct payment or rebate to an OEM or EVSP who
successfully manages the customer’s charging load rather than through a retail rate discount.
7 Reply Comments of VGIC on TEF Sections 7 and 8 at 5-9.
8 Assumes 2000 kWh/yr in charging load, and 10-year EVSE life. See Reply Comments of VGIC on TEF Sections 7
and 8 at 5-9 for more information on cost recovery and potential revenue sharing options.
11

3. As part of the TEF, the PUC should direct IOUs to offer rate offsets or bill
credits to compensate for the value of energy exported to the grid from EVs
through V2G capabilities.
VGIC believes that V2G compensation is a high priority issue, and associated compensation
mechanisms must be addressed in parallel to addressing technical barriers in order to unlock the
full potential of VGI. One such compensation mechanism is a retail rate offset or bill credit
associated with exports. This is discussed more fully in our comments in Section E below.
C. VGI Staff Paper, VGI WG Recommendation 1.01: Rate design for demand
charge mitigation.
Please refer to VGIC comments above in Section B-1 on “Dynamic Distribution Rate
Approaches”
D. VGI Staff Paper, VGI WG Recommendation 1.09: NEM for EVs
VGIC is generally supportive of increasing the number of rate options available to EV
customers, including NEM options. We believe that optionality is critical to developing nascent
markets and allowing customers to choose the solutions which are optimal for their unique
needs. As such, we believe that expanding the eligibility of NEM for SCE and SDG&E
commercial EV customers to match what already is available for PG&E customers is a sensible
approach.
E. VGI Staff Paper, VGI WG Recommendation 1.16: Credit for V2G Exports
The VGI WG Final Report clearly concluded that the potential to leverage V2G technology
represents a tremendous opportunity for the state of California. As discussed in comments on the
12

TEF VGI Section and VGI Issues, the VGIC finds ample justification for the Commission to
issue guidance on VGI that promotes no-regrets investments in V2G. Most notably, V2G can
support grid reliability (including meeting peak net load), help integrate renewables, aid
community resilience, and accelerate transportation electrification. Standards development
organizations (“SDOs”) are actively advancing strategies to alleviate technical barriers to V2G
Alternating Current (“V2G AC”) interconnection. If adopted, the recent Rule 21 Proposed
Decision will require IOUs to support the work of SDOs, develop pathways to interconnect V2G
AC pilots, and streamline processes to interconnect and track V2G Direct Current (“V2G DC”).9
These technology and standards developments have provided greater certainty to OEMs as they
pursue new product developments. However, technology and standards work must be
accomplished in parallel to the development of compensation mechanisms to incentivize
customers and market actors to deploy beneficial V2G capabilities. This is especially true if
these capabilities are expected to be deployed at scale to support the grid’s needs.
VGIC recognizes that some VGI compensation pathways could involve direct
participation in CAISO wholesale markets through either the Non-Generator Resource or Proxy-
Demand Response models. VGIC supports continued development of these options through
engagement with the CAISO. However, VGIC believes that these direct wholesale pathways
may not be appropriate for V2G due their exclusion of exports. Even if exports were included,
they may not be appropriate for all retail customers due to a) the complexity of wholesale market
participation and cost-prohibitive requirements for metering and telemetry, b) ongoing
controversies over retail versus wholesale charging rates for behind-the-meter resources, and c)
9 Proposed Decision Adopting Recommendations from Working Groups Two, Three, and Subgroup, filed by
Administrative Law Judge Anne E. Simon (“ALJ”) on August 20, 2020 in R.17-07-007.
13

the fact that these approaches narrowly limit compensation to wholesale market values which
may not capture the full set of societal and economic benefits V2G can provide.
As such, VGIC strongly encourages the Commission to explore additional options for
compensating energy exported to the grid under a V2G approach. As highlighted in the VGI
Staff Paper, several mechanisms warrant consideration, and VGIC believes the following options
may represent some possible compensation pathways:
 Integration into Net Energy Metering (“NEM”) Tariff options (either in its current
iteration or as part of the forthcoming “NEM 3.0”)
 A new, standalone feed-in tariff
 A V2G export bill credit administered as part of the TEPs or proposed VGI Portfolio.
Each of these strategies has advantages and drawbacks. Under the NEM approach, VGIC could
envision a similar approach to stationary energy storage which would involve revising the
California Energy Commission’s (“CEC”) Renewable Portfolio Standard (“RPS”) Guidebook to
allow V2G to become eligible as an “addition or enhancement.” This approach would offer the
same advantages that has made NEM a successful program for helping to scale up distributed
solar resources such as simplicity for customers and streamlined interconnection. However,
unless changes are made to the definition of NEM-eligible resources, current NEM rules could
limit compensation to the subset of V2G use cases in which V2G exports are paired with eligible
renewable generation. This would effectively exclude all EV customers who do not have on-site
renewable energy generation. Additionally, for certain OEMs, a compensation pathway that is
solely dependent on retail customer rate offsets via NEM presents a challenge in terms of
justifying investments in V2G technologies. While there are advantages to being able to
advertise these features to new EV owners, a more direct revenue stream could enhance the
business case for OEMs to build robust V2G capabilities into future EV model designs.
14

A feed-in tariff approach represents a sensible alternative to NEM, however it also faces
some similar challenges. Specifically, if the feed-in tariff is designed similarly to CPUC’s
existing ReMAT program, it may be constrained by the limitations of PURPA which would also
require pairing with an eligible generator. This would similarly exclude use cases without on-site
renewables. Notwithstanding these issues, VGIC strongly supports further exploration of a feed-
in tariff-style approach as a medium-term strategy for enabling V2G. In particular, this could
offer a more direct revenue stream for OEMs and EVSPs to help justify robust V2G investments.
However, certain challenges would still need to be resolved regarding eligibility, compensation
structure, and other program features. We would encourage the PUC staff to consider a separate
proceeding that could help to begin developing this program and resolve these issues.
Given these limitations, at this time, VGIC recommends the Commission focus on
developing a V2G Export Bill Credit option as a primary near-term option for retail customer
V2G compensation. As discussed in previous comments, VGIC envisions a VGI Portfolio
framework, which includes a V2G bill credit program, could be developed within the DRIVE
OIR and eventually integrated into each IOU’s TEPs. A V2G Export Bill Credit would provide a
bill credit to retail customers (or V2G providers) that export power from their V2G-capable
EV/EVSE that the ￼value to the grid￼at the time of export (and any other values deemed
appropriate). To accelerate the nascent V2G market, VGIC posits the credit value will need to be
large enough to meaningfully spur customer adoption and familiarity with V2G technologies. As
a starting point, VGIC recommends the Commission consider setting a compensation level that is
commensurate with the customer’s 10 retail rate option.￼ This approach has similar advantages
to net energy metering which was instrumental in advancing distributed solar in its infancy.
10 A secondary option could be to provide credit at hourly wholesale rates similar to the Power Your Drive program.
However, VGIC does not recommend this approach given the drawbacks described in these comments.
15

Namely, it is simple for customers to understand, limits administrative burden, and is a good
proxy for grid value (at least for low penetration levels). Meanwhile, the credit can be
administered transparently in accordance with CPUC Rate Principle 8 (“Incentives should be
explicit and transparent”) and gradually adjusted upward or downward as experience is gained.
Moreover, VGIC believes that tying a credit to prevailing ￼EV TOU rates ￼could provide a
substantial customer benefit that would encourage both overall EV adoption and V2G
participation. The table below provides an illustrative example of the potential V2G value for an
EV customer (or V2G implementer) using their vehicle to export energy during peak hours:
[A] 300 Wh per mile vehicle efficiency
[B] 25 miles per day traveled
[C]=[A]*[B] 7.5 kWh mobility usage per day
[D] 5 kW charging power
[E]=[C]/[D] 1.5 hours to recharge mobility power
[F] 8 hours of dwell time during off-peak
rate window
[G]=[F]-[G] 6.5 available off-peak hours for arbitrage
[H] 6 hours of dwell time during on-peak
rate window
[I] $0.15 off-peak rate per kWh
[J] $0.45 on-peak rate per kWh
[K]=[D]*[H] 30 kWh charging for V2G
[L]=[K]*0.9 27.0 kWh discharging for V2G (assumes
90% RTE)
[M]=[J]*[L]- $7.65 V2G credit (less charging cost)
[I]*[K]
[N] 200 days per year
[O]=[M]*[N] $1,530 annual V2G value
Furthermore, VGIC recommends the Commission and IOUs consider how vehicle
telematics and/or EVSE submetering can assist tracking V2G exports, as opposed to requiring
new metering equipment. VGIC has observed that onerous metering requirements tend to limit
customer enrollment in EV rates and VGI programs, and strongly recommends the Commission
16

avoid imposing such requirements whenever possible. Instead, the Commission should consider
the lower-cost options embedded within the EV and/or EVSE. For example, V2G bill credits
could be easily determined using OEM telematics or EVSE submetering data on hourly vehicle
charging/discharging either independently or in combination with existing utility interval meter
data. Additionally, VGIC previously commented on the role OEMs/EVSPs could play in
enrolling customers and promoting ongoing participation in VGI rates and programs through
upstream incentives. These enrollment and participation incentives could be co-developed with a
V2G credit program and any associated data requirements. VGIC also encourages the
Commission to consider how an approach that directly includes OEMs in delivering bill credits
could also help resolve the challenge of offering a direct revenue stream to justify V2G
investment. For example, one approach would be to remunerate the bill credits directly to OEMs
that could demonstrate verified V2G exports and allow them to pass a significant fraction of
these savings on to participating EV customers through a lease or other arrangement. This is
somewhat analogous to a “community solar”-style approach for V2G. Regarding the feasibility
of this arrangement, VGIC notes that vehicle telematics and EVSE submetering have been
leveraged for EV TOU charging incentive programs proposed by utilities in other jurisdictions
(e.g. National Grid in Massachusetts, or Xcel Energy in Minnesota), and thus there is some
precedent for this type of approach.
VGIC recognizes VGIC recognizes IOUs and other parties have previously cautioned
against exploring V2G export compensation, citing the nascency of the market. VGIC believes
the development of a compensation mechanism for V2G exports is one of the central catalysts
required to overcome the “chicken or egg” problem that has plagued V2G market development
17

to date. Even so, to address these concerns VGIC offers the following recommendations on
appropriately scaling the V2G export bill credit and ensuring value of V2G is fully considered.
1. Appropriately scaling V2G
VGIC recognizes that there may be concerns with the possible ratepayer cost impacts of an open-
ended V2G export credit option. While we believe it is premature to determine the net impact to
ratepayers at this time (including costs, benefits, and participation rates), we acknowledge that
some safeguards may be appropriate. As such, we recommend the Commission consider an
initial V2G bill credit participation cap of 450,000 customers which roughly equates to 30% of
California’s 1.5 million EV by 2025 target. Priority should be provided to EV customers on TOU
rates that can provide (or have an OEM/EVSP provide) hourly charging data. We believe that
this cap should be reevaluated if it is reached. Additionally, as noted above, an alternative
crediting option may to link the bill credit to hourly wholesale market rates (rather than retail
TOU rates), similar to the SDG&E Power Your Drive program. If customers choose this option,
we believe there should be no cap on the number of eligible participants.
2. Additional studies can help inform future V2G export credit options.
As mentioned, additional studies on the value of V2G may be helpful in informing the future
direction of V2G bill credits. However, VGIC believes it is premature to conduct these until
there is more experience with how EV customers, OEMs, and EVSPs are actually performing on
V2G deployment. It is also premature to determine if our recommended approach would yield a
net cost or net benefit to customers, however we are eager to engage with the PUC and other
stakeholders to discuss how this analysis should be conducted. In conducting this valuation,
VGIC notes that it will be important to weigh not only the potential ratepayer cost of V2G bill
credits, but also:
18

a) the grid value from the following: avoided energy costs, avoided capacity costs, avoided
line losses, avoided GHG emissions, avoided transmission and distribution costs, etc., and
b) the ratepayer impact value to non-participants from increased kWh sales as EV adoption
rates increase.
F. VGI Staff Paper, VGI WG Recommendation 1.18: Partially dynamic rates
VGIC is generally supportive of fully dynamic rates to the extent they are feasible. VGIC
believes they are feasible in most cases, however, we recognize that in some cases, IOUs may
not be able to offer fully dynamic rates for certain secondary distribution system related costs
and would encourage consideration of partially dynamic rates as a “second best” option in those
instances. This was discussed above in Section B-1.
IV. COMMENTS ON DRAFT TEF SECTION 10
A. Section 10.4, Question 1: Should the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC)
consider applications from community choice aggregators (CCA) for approval to
develop their own programs, or administer a portion of the investor-owned utilities’
(IOU) authorized transportation electrification (TE) programs using budgets that are
recovered through IOU customer rates?
At this time, VGIC does not have a view on whether CCAs should be considered as program
implementers but is open to the concept. That said, we believe the Commission has little to no
jurisdiction over CCAs in this matter and this would only be viable if the CCAs did so
voluntarily. If they did choose to participate, VGIC views CCAs as potentially constructive
partners in helping deliver VGI related programs and activities. Specifically, CCAs have a
unique and important understanding of local issues and complexities within their service
territories, and this capability should be leveraged to advance VGI and TE more broadly. For
19

example, implementation of the ALM tariff concept described above is well suited for CCAs to
leverage both due to their need to lower charging infrastructure costs, and due to their knowledge
of local electrical codes and standards that can ensure safe implementation ALM requirements.
Additionally, CCAs may have useful knowledge of how best to harmonize OEM telematics data
for use in VGI-related activities.
V. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit these opening comments on Rates,
Partnerships, and Emerging Technology sections of the Draft TEF. We look forward to further
collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
Edward Burgess
Policy Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400
Berkeley, California 94704
Telephone: (941) 266-0017
Email: eburgess@vgicouncil.org
Date: September 11, 2020
20