BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA FILED
03/06/20
04:59 PM
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Continue
Rulemaking 18-12-006
the Development of Rates and
(Filed December 13, 2018)
Infrastructure for Vehicle Electrification.
OPENING COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON
THE TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION FRAMEWORK (SECTIONS 2, 3.1, 3.2,
3.3, 4, AND 5)
Edward Burgess
Policy Director
Zach Woogen
Senior Analyst
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400
Berkeley, California 94704
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
Dated: March 6, 2020
1 / 17

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Continue the
Rulemaking 18-12-006
Development of Rates and Infrastructure for
(Filed December 13, 2018)
Vehicle Electrification.
OPENING COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON
THE TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION FRAMEWORK (SECTIONS 2, 3.1, 3.2,
3.3, 4, AND 5)
In accordance with Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”)1 hereby submits
its opening comments on certain sections of the draft Transportation Electrification Framework
(“Draft TEF”) in Rulemakings (“R.”) 18-12-006 on February 25, 2020. Pursuant to
Administrative Law Judge’s Ruling Adding Staff Proposal for a Draft Transportation
Electrification Framework to the Record and Inviting Party Comments (“Ruling”) and E-mail
Ruling Setting Updated Schedule for Party Comment on the Draft Transportation Electrification
Framework, issued by Administrative Law Judge Patrick Doherty on February 3, 2020 and
February 14, 2020, respectively, VGIC timely files these comments on March 6, 2020 in R. 18-
12-006. VGIC was granted party status in this proceeding on January 28, 2020.
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., Enel X North America, Inc.,
Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, Ford Motor Company, General Motors Company, and Nuvve Corporation. The views
expressed in these Comments are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all of the individual
VGIC member companies or supporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/).
1
2 / 17

I. INTRODUCTION.
A. Overview of VGIC
VGIC is a 501(c)6 membership-based advocacy group committed to advancing the role
of electric vehicles (“EVs”) and vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”) through policy development,
education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to a decarbonized transportation
and electric sector by ensuring the value from EV deployments and flexible EV charging and
discharging is recognized and compensated in support of achieving a more reliable, affordable,
and efficient electric grid.
B. Organization of VGIC’s Comments
VGIC’s comments are organized as follows:
 First, VGIC raises some fundamental concerns with the Draft TEF in relation to the
specific timeline and budget constraints proposed. These concerns align with VGIC’s
support of the Motion of the Joint Parties to Stay the Draft TEF filed concurrently in this
proceeding.
 Second, VGIC addresses specific questions and recommendations from Sections 3, 4,
and 5 of the Draft TEF that were posed by the Commission. In responding to these
questions, VGIC provides several recommendations for the Commission’s consideration.
 Finally, VGIC provides a summary of recommendations from its answers to the
questions.
II. Fundamental Concerns with the Draft TEF Timeline and Budget Constraints.
A. VGIC supports the Commission’s efforts to establish a long-term TE framework
VGIC understands the Commission’s goal of developing a long-term and sustainable framework
to better prioritize and evaluate the investor owned utilities’ (“IOUs”) transportation
2
3 / 17

electrification (“TE”) programs. In recent years, the Commission has authorized over one billion
dollars in ratepayer funds for TE investments, with another one billion currently pending review.
These TE proposals and related programs have been made on an ad hoc, case-by-case basis. This
has created significant uncertainty for the EV industry, the IOUs, and California ratepayers. As
California continues to ramp up its TE efforts to meet decarbonization goals, a more holistic and
streamlined framework for evaluation and authorization can provide greater certainty to the
industry over the long run, which is a concept the VGIC broadly supports. The Draft TEF makes
progress towards this goal of establishing a holistic framework for California’s TE programs
over the long term. However, VGIC believes the Draft TEF has significant shortcomings,
particularly regarding the interim period between now and when the long-term framework is in
full effect. Additionally, the long-term framework could also be improved, as further explained
in Section III below.
B. The Draft TEF places significant and inflexible limitations on near-term TE actions
that will unnecessarily delay progress towards California’s decarbonization goals
VGIC is concerned that the Draft TEF would lead to a protracted period of very limited TE
investment over the next several years. This is due to the significant time it will take to
accomplish the following: 1) adopt the final TEF, 2) develop TE Plans (“TEPs”) under the
adopted framework, 3) review and approve TEPs, 4) develop TE program applications under the
approved TEP, 5) review and approve TE program applications and 6) implement approved TE
programs, before any significant investments are made. Not only is this proposed timeline
considerably prolonged, but it is compounded by the strict limitations placed on any near-term
actions that can be taken in the form of the $20 million budget cap, the limited number of
authorized near-term actions, and the inability to put forward additional ad hoc TE plans during
3
4 / 17

the interim period. A significant delay in any one of the steps listed above would likely mean
fewer EVs on the road. Not only would the Draft TEF delay new TE infrastructure, but it could
also needlessly restrict the ability to leverage existing TE infrastructure to provide near-term grid
benefits through scaled up VGI programs. This ultimately means there will be fewer
opportunities for VGIC members and supporters to implement new business models, develop
new technologies, or realize customer benefits associated with VGI related activities.
Given the prolonged timeline to implement the first TEPs and limitations on near-term
investment priorities, the Commission and stakeholders are unable to take meaningful, timely
action to deploy the required TE solutions. In contrast, the ad hoc approach that has been used to
date, has led to meaningful near-term actions and investments, despite lacking a holistic strategy
to meet State TE goals. While the ad hoc approach had shortcomings, it also had greater
flexibility to ensure California was on the path towards meeting its overarching policy goals.
C. Greater flexibility for near-term TE actions is critical to the uninterrupted success of
the growing EV industry in California
To ensure that the EV industry continues the growth necessary to meet California’s
decarbonization goals, the VGIC supports the Motion of Joint Parties to Stay the Draft TEF.
VGIC would be appreciate a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to propose alternative
frameworks to the TEF. We believe this approach to allow alternative proposals is a sensible
path towards alleviating the problematic limitations on timeline and near-term budget in the
Draft TEF.
In the spirt of identifying alternative framework proposals, VGIC provides some
recommendations in these comments for the Commission’s consideration of potential
modifications to the Draft TEF which would allow more flexibility in the interim period between
4
5 / 17

now and when the TEF framework is in full effect. These modifications could include the
following:
 Allow an expanded list of approved near-term investment options,
 Remove the per-IOU budgetary cap on near-term investments, and;
 Allow for additional ad hoc TE programs to be proposed and reviewed until the final
TEF is adopted, under the current rules and guidance used to date
III. Responses to Commission Questions and Recommendations for TEF Sections 3
(excluding Section 3.4), 4 and 5.
In this section, VGIC provides responses to the specific questions and recommendations posed in
the Ruling related to the following sections of the TEF:
 Section 3 (excluding Section 3.4): IOU TEP Development,
 Section 4: IOU Roles, and
 Section 5: Near-term Investment Priorities.
 Section 8: Technology and Standards
A. RESPONSE TO QUESTIONS ON SECTION 3: IOU TEP DEVELOPMENT.
Section 3.1, Question 2: What additional guidance is needed to inform how existing
planning processes for IOUs and regulatory development efforts at other
State agencies should be leveraged to develop TEPs?
The Draft TEF recommends the IOUs’ ICA maps, an effort under the DRP proceeding
(R.14-18-013), be used to develop infrastructure targets and proposed budgets in the TEPs by
identifying areas where TE load could be added without triggering distribution upgrades. The
5
6 / 17

Draft TEF also recommends the ICA maps be used to identify areas where “load management
solutions such as on-site renewable generation and storage facilities” can be used to defer system
upgrades.2 VGIC supports both recommended uses of the ICA to identify locational
opportunities for load management solutions to be implemented and areas where there is
available capacity for TE infrastructure. To the extent the ICA is used to identify mitigation
options for TE load, VGIC also recommends the Commission include flexible charging and – as
the market develops – discharging capabilities in the set of load management solutions that IOUs
should consider. Moreover, VGIC cautions that the inherent flexibility of charging and
discharging is one reason why the ICA maps should not be overly prescriptive in determining
where TE load can or cannot be added (so long as that capability is adequately leveraged).
Section 3.1/3.2/3.3, Recommendation 6: Provide full TEP updates every four years,
starting in 2026.
VGIC believes that a TEP update period of four years does not appropriately reflect the
pace of TE-related policy and market development and that a more frequent update cycle is more
appropriate. This is especially true for the VGI-related components of TE programs, which may
have the ability to leverage existing EVs and EVSE assets to provide new services on a
compressed timeline that is unrelated to TE infrastructure development.3 The pace at which new
VGI solutions are expected to emerge warrants a shorter gap between TEP updates and related
program implementation. VGIC recommends the Commission consider a period of two-years
2 Draft TEF at 22.
3 Learning from past TE programs and pilots, a TE program’s physical assets are likely to result in longer lead times
than the non-infrastructure components.
6
7 / 17

between TEP updates to better reflect the pace of the challenges and opportunities the TEF
intends to address. For VGI components, even more frequent updates may be warranted.
Additionally, certain distinct milestones, such as the adoption of an interconnection
pathway for V2G alternative current (“V2G-AC”) systems, may also prompt the need for a TEP
update. Added flexibility is needed within the TEP update schedule for TEPs to account for these
types of “threshold” developments or other milestones that unlock new EV markets and services.
VGIC recommends that the Commission consider the merits of a mechanism for certain distinct
milestones to trigger an “out of cycle” TEP update.
B. RESPONSE TO QUESTIONS ON SECTION 4: IOU ROLES.
Section 4, Question 1: Do you agree that the IOUs’ TEPs should evaluate
opportunities to address each of the barriers identified in Table 3? If not,
what barriers should be excluded, or are missing, and why?
VGIC agrees that the IOUs’ TEPs should evaluate opportunities to address barriers, such
as those identified in Table 3. VGIC supports the consideration of barriers related to industry
structure and the role of the IOU in coordinating “different types of market actors such as
automakers and EVSPs to provide services such as VGI.” 4 VGIC believes the IOUs have an
important role in current and future VGI market development efforts. However, VGIC notes that
it is not the sole responsibility of the IOUs alone to address certain barriers identified in Table 3.
For example, regarding “Uncertain or Unfavorable Standards” market actors are currently
awaiting direction from the Commission on next steps resulting from the V2G-AC
Interconnection Technical Sub-Group Report filed in this proceeding and in R.17-07-007. The
4 Draft TEF at 40.
7
8 / 17

lack of current IOU and industry stakeholder alignment around technical standards remains a key
barrier to VGI market development.
VGIC also agrees that electric rate design is an area where IOUs can play a strong role to
address market demand barriers. However, the development of enhanced rates for EVs can
benefit from substantial input from industry stakeholders.
Regarding barriers that may be missing from Table 3, VGIC notes that the VGI Working
Group established as part of this proceeding is currently working on developing a set of policy
recommendations that will address barriers to specific VGI use cases. Some of these
recommendations are likely to include a role for IOUs. Once this list is fully developed by the
Working Group it could easily be used to supplement the barriers identified in Table 3.
C. RESPONSE TO QUESTIONS ON SECTION 5: NEAR-TERM INVESTMENT
PRIORITIES.
Section 5, Question 1: Should the IOUs’ pre-TEP program proposals be limited to these
identified priority areas? Why or why not?
No, the IOUs’ pre-TEP program proposals should not be limited to the small subset of areas
identified in the Draft TEF. As explained above in Section II of these comments, additional near-
term actions are needed to ensure alignment with the state’s policy goals and to continue to
develop the EV and VGI markets. Moreover, the execution of TE programs alone does not
constitute success in achieving state TE and decarbonization goals, and additional time to make
program adjustments may be needed to match customer response.
The Draft TEF puts forth an example timeline that would set the first full TE program
applications for Q1 2023, with an option for IOUs to delay their first full TE program application
8
9 / 17

to Q1 2025. This suggests that robust TE investments (and corresponding VGI market
opportunities) are unlikely to emerge until at least 2024 and might be delayed until 2026.5 If this
is the possible timeline the PUC is contemplating for investment under the TEF, then there needs
to significant alternative avenues for near-term investment, beyond the few options suggested in
the Draft TEF. Notably, several VGIC members who are automotive manufacturers’ (“OEMs”)
have product development cycles for EV hardware and software components related to VGI use
cases tend range from three to five years. Some of these products that are being developed now
may face the prospect of limited market opportunity if the necessary TE investments are not
ready for 5-6 years. As such, the OEMs may have developed manufacturing lines that bcome
“stranded assets.”
Any delay in the development of TE programs and infrastructure is further exacerbated
by technology lock-in associated with new vehicles, as the average light-duty vehicle (“LDV”)
life is 11.8 years.6 VGIC is concerned that limiting the scope of what IOUs may include in their
pre-TEP program proposals would delay and hinder real opportunity for sectors and use cases
not identified as priority to contribute to the decarbonization of California’s transportation and
electricity sectors.
Not only should TE be expedited as a powerful tool for decarbonization, but accelerated
deployment is warranted as a direct benefit to all utility customers since EV charging can also
result in downward pressure on rates. The increase in kWh consumption provides a larger
5 Historically, the least amount of time between an initial EV program or TE application and an adopted decision is
about twelve months. PG&E’s Commercial EV Rate (A.18-11-003) was adopted a few weeks short of one full year
after the initial application. Pilot-scale Priority Review Projects (PRP) were adopted for all three IOUs’ TE
Applications (A.17-01-020, A.17-01-021, and A.17-01-022) after about twelve months. The Standard Review
projects were adopted roughly 18 months following the initial TE application filing. PG&E’s Empower EV program
(A.18-07-021) and SCE’s Charge Ready program (A.14-10-014) were both adopted about 18 months after filing.
6 IHS Markit, Average Age of Cars and Light Trucks in U.S. Rises Again in 2019 to 11.8 Years (June 27, 2019)
https://news.ihsmarkit.com/prviewer/release_only/slug/automotive-average-age-cars-and-light-trucks-us-rises-
again-2019-118-years-ihs-markit-
9
10 / 17

number of sales over which to distribute utility fixed costs. This benefit can be further bolstered
by enabling VGI services. This downward pressure on rates is a benefit that will not be realized
unless deployment of TE, EVs, and VGI programs reach large-scale implementation.
While the TEF will establish important guidance in the long term, the Commission does
already have processes and mechanisms in place to review TE program proposals for
reasonableness. Previous TE applications, while ad hoc in nature, have still been scrutinized
through a full CPUC rate setting process (i.e. including evidentiary hearings), and to ensure that
the investment decisions are prudent and reflect an equitable balance of stakeholder interests.
VGIC recommends the Commission not necessarily limit the IOUs’ pre-TEP program
proposals to the priority areas identified in the Draft TEF. Specifically, VGIC strongly disagrees
with the Energy Division’s recommendation that “the IOUs should not propose new investment
programs where the market shows signs of private sector engagement, such as single-family
home residential charging stations and workplace L1 or L2 charging deployment.” 7 The
implication therefore is that TE programs addressing single-family home residential charging
and workplace charging deployment will not be implemented until the IOUs’ first TE program
applications are implemented, which as previously discussed will not occur before 2023.8
Given the long lead times associated with TE programs resulting from the Draft TEF, the
risk of technology lock-in, the cost of deferring rate reduction through increased kWh usage and
VGI applications, and the availability of existing Commission processes, VGIC supports a more
open approach to pre-TEP program proposals.
7 Draft TEF at 44.
8 Draft TEF at 26.
10
11 / 17

Section 5, Question 2: If not, identify any other program priorities that should be
considered appropriate for pre-TEP programs and provide detailed
information about why the investment would be “no-regrets”.
As discussed in our response to Section 5, Question 1 above, VGIC does not support
limiting pre-TEP program proposals to identified priority areas. However, VGIC believes that a
list of priority areas could help to guide and expedite pre-TEP proposals. We would like to
identify several VGI use cases that are currently excluded from the Draft TEF’s near-term
investment priorities list.
Recent initiatives by the Commission have demonstrated meaningful progress in
alleviating barriers and developing the market for VGI. The VGI Working Group will answer
several questions posed by the Commission, including the question “what VGI use cases can
provide value now, and how can that value be captured?” 9 The answer to this and the other
questions in the scope of the VGI Working Group should inform utility TEPs, as recommended
in the Draft TEF.10 Specifically, the working group is currently identifying areas where TE
programs may be needed to enable near-term VGI use cases, or those that can provide value
now. VGIC recommends that this subset of VGI use cases be considered in the list of priority
areas for near term investments.
Section 5, Question 3: Is $20 million per IOU an appropriate budgetary cap for pre-TEP
programs? Why or why not?
No, $20 million per IOU is not an appropriate budgetary cap for pre-TEP programs. As
discussed in our response to Section 5, Question 1, limiting pre-TEP programs in scope will
9 Assigned Commissioner’s Scoping Memo and Ruling at 11.
10 Draft TEF at 138.
11
12 / 17

unnecessarily hinder market development and be present barriers to meeting California’s TE and
decarbonization goals in a cost-effective manner. The same supporting argument applies to
raising the budgetary cap. Limitations to the budget for pre-TEP programs will delay the
timeframe for TE goals, risk technology lock-in, and sacrifice an opportunity to place downward
pressure on rates through VGI. There exist previously developed Commission processes that can
be leveraged to determine reasonableness of pre-TEP programs.
Previously approved TE programs, such as SDG&E Power Your Drive and SCE Charge
Ready, have addressed the pilot-scale implementation, specifically for the (LDV) sector. Meeting
state policy goals will require a transition from pilot-scale programs to large-scale
implementation, and VGIC believes that LDV applications have reached a point of maturity
where this implementation is justified. Given $4 million as the reference point for pilot
programs, the proposed $20 million could fund five pilot programs. In VGIC’s view this is very
limiting. For example, the VGI Working Group recently identified several hundred use cases that
could provide value and may warrant consideration for pilot programs. VGIC is concerned that
the proposed $20 million cap is wholly insufficient to fund the scale of deployment needed,
specifically for sectors mature enough for large-scale deployment, such as LDV.
VGIC recommends the Commission eliminate the strict and arbitrary budgetary cap for
pre-TEP programs.
Section 5.2, Question 1: Should the IOUs prioritize projects that will test and
validate resiliency strategies that utilize EVs as grid resources and ensure
EV drivers have adequate access to charging options during power
outages? If yes, how should the IOUs design their pilot(s)? What sector(s)
12
13 / 17

should the pilot(s) target? What use cases should the IOUs prioritize in
their pilot(s)?
VGIC agrees that IOUs should prioritize projects that will test and validate resiliency
strategies that utilize EVs as grid resources. Pilot programs that focus on enabling EVs to
provide backup power in a resiliency event, such as a Public Safety Power Shutoff (“PSPS”), are
a near-term priority for several stakeholders, as expressed in the Microgrid and Resiliency
Strategies proceeding (R.19-09-009) by California Energy Storage Alliance (“CESA”), Connect
California, Pacific Gas and Electric (“PG&E”), and VGIC.11 Our comments in that proceeding
indicate that the current state of technology, including capabilities of smart meters and available
EVs, calls for consideration of vehicle-to-load (“V2L”) backup power solutions. 12 Solutions that
use EVs as backup power during a PSPS event warrants serious consideration as a near-term
priority given the high potential to provide benefits to customers.
At the Interconnection Discussion Forum held on December 16, 2019, CESA and
Connect California presented a proposal to use smart meters to intentionally island customers
and allow devices to provide backup power with only one piece of additional equipment
required.13 A pilot program could be modeled after this proposal to leverage existing advanced
metering infrastructure (“AMI”). A pilot program modeled after this proposal would require an
amount of investment less than $4 million, complying with the proposed definition of a pilot
program.14 Program costs could go towards purchasing and installing transfer switches, which
11 Comments of CESA on Track 1 Microgrid and Resiliency Strategies Staff Proposal (January 30, 2020) in R.19-09-
009 at 11, Comments of Connect California on Track 1 Microgrid and Resiliency Strategies Staff Proposal (January
30, 2020) in R.19-09-009 at 7-8, Comments of PG&E on Track 1 Microgrid and Resiliency Strategies Staff Proposal
(January 30, 2020) in R.19-09-009 at 9 and 12-13, and Comments of VGIC on Track 1 Microgrid and Resiliency
Strategies Staff Proposal (January 30, 2020) in R.19-09-009 at 3.
12 Comments of VGIC on Track 1 Microgrid and Resiliency Strategies Staff Proposal (January 30, 2020) in R.19-09-
009 at 3.
13 Track 1 Microgrid and Resiliency Strategies Staff Proposal (January 21, 2020) in R.19-09-009 at 10.
14 Draft TEF at 17.
13
14 / 17

are UL-listed meter socket mounted devices. The program could target sectors where there is
demand for backup power to meet on-site load during outages, such as residential customers in
single family homes. The IOUs could conduct marketing, education, and outreach to garner
interest for the program, install transfer switches at customer sites, enroll customers in the
program, notify them ahead of a PSPS event, and intentionally island these customers remotely.
Section 5, Recommendation 1(d): [Energy Division recommends CPUC direct IOUs
to] Coordinate with other IOU resiliency efforts, including but not limited
to, R.19-09-009, R.18-12-005, and R.12-11-005.
VGIC supports this recommendation and believes that coordination across existing
CPUC initiatives is central to achieving the goals of the TEF and of resiliency initiatives. As
discussed in our response to Section 5.2, Question 1(a), VGIC recommends a pilot program to
use EVs as V2L backup power. V2G backup power is another way that EVs can contribute to
IOU resiliency efforts, for example in a microgrid application. The V2G-AC Interconnection
Technical Sub-Group Report identified several potential next steps that would alleviate barriers
to V2G applications, including those with potentially high value in the context of resiliency. For
example, industry representatives are currently engaged in addressing one identified action item,
updates to SAE J3072. To that end, VGIC supports the IOUs’ continued coordination with R.17-
07-007 to enable V2G-AC interconnection pathways, a collaboration which has the potential to
unlock immense resiliency benefit.
D. Initial comments on Section 8: Technology and Standards
VGIC recognizes that the Commission will be seeking additional comments on Technology and
Standards later this year and intends to provide more detailed input on this matter at the
14
15 / 17

appropriate time. However, as an initial high-level concern, VGIC does not recommend that the
TEF select or mandate any specific communications protocols at this time, and rather allow the
market to determine which protocols are used.
V. Summary of Recommendations
In responding to the questions above, VGIC proposes several recommendations, which can be
summarized as followed:
Overarching recommendations:
 The Final TEF should include more flexibility during the interim period between now
and when the framework is in full effect. To this end, the VGIC supports the Motion of
the Joint Parties, filed concurrently in this docket, requesting that the Commission allow
parties to propose alternative TEFs, hold a meeting to develop consensus around
objectives and scope of the TEF, and set a comment period on the alternative proposals.
Section 3
 To the extent the Integration Capacity Analysis (“ICA”) and other existing
processes are used to develop their TEPs, they should include VGI solutions to
enable greater TE load.
 The duration between TEP updates should be shortened to accurately reflect the
pace of TE market development, particularly for non-infrastructure activities
(such as certain VGI applications).
Section 4
 VGIC supports several of the IOU roles identified in Table 3 of the Draft TEF,
including coordinating with market actors to enable VGI services, providing
appropriate electric rates, and identifying standards needed to support VGI.
Section 5
 The IOUs’ pre-TEP proposals should not be limited to the identified priority
areas, as this risks imposing high societal costs, deferring opportunity to reduce
15
16 / 17

customer rates, and significant misalignment with state TE and broader
decarbonization goals.
 A list of priority areas could guide and help expedite pre-TEP proposals, and this
list should incorporate ongoing initiatives to identify and develop markets for
VGI use cases.
 The $20 million budgetary cap on pre-TEP proposals is inappropriate since it
restricts large-scale implementation of TE programs in the near-term; instead, the
Commission should consider eliminating the strict and arbitrary budgetary cap to
meaningfully support California’s TE and broader decarbonization goals.
 VGIC recommends one possible approach to a pilot program enabling EVs to
provide backup power in resiliency use cases.
 VGIC supports the recommendation that IOUs should coordinate with
proceedings relevant to EVs and resiliency when developing pre-TEP plans; to
the extent possible, IOUs should also coordinate with non-Commission efforts
essential to scaling VGI for resiliency applications.
V. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit these opening comments on the TEP
development, IOU roles, and near-term investment priorities sections of the Draft TEF. We look
forward to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
Edward Burgess
Policy Director
VEHICLE GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400
Berkeley, California 94704
Telephone: (941) 266-0017
Email: eburgess@vgicouncil.org
Date: March 6, 2020
16
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
17 / 17