BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Continue
Rulemaking 18-12-006
the Development of Rates and
(Filed December 13, 2018)
Infrastructure for Vehicle Electrification.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE
TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION FRAMEWORK (SECTIONS 7 AND 8)
Edward Burgess
Policy Director
Zach Woogen
Senior Analyst
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400
Berkeley, California 94704
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
Dated: July 14, 2020

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Continue the
Rulemaking 18-12-006
Development of Rates and Infrastructure for
(Filed December 13, 2018)
Vehicle Electrification.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE
TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION FRAMEWORK (SECTIONS 7 AND 8)
In accordance with Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council1 (“VGIC”) hereby submits
these comments on the Administrative Law Judge’s Ruling Adding Staff Proposal for a Draft
Transportation Electrification Framework to the Record and Inviting Party Comments
(“Ruling”) issued by Administrative Law Judge (“ALJ”) Patrick Doherty on February 3, 2020.
Pursuant to Email Granting Request for Extension of Time to Submit Comments on Sections 7
and 8 of the Transportation Electrification Framework issued by ALJ Sasha Goldberg on July 2,
2020, VGIC timely files these comments on Sections 7 and 8 of the Draft Transportation
Electrification Framework (“Draft TEF”) on July 14, 2020.
I. INTRODUCTION.
A. Overview of VGIC
VGIC is a 501(c)6 membership-based advocacy group committed to advancing the role
of electric vehicles (“EVs”) and vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”) through policy development,
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., Connect California LLC, Enel
X North America, Inc., Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, Ford Motor Company, General Motors Company, Nissan North
America, Inc., Nuvve Corporation, and Toyota Motor North America, Inc. The views expressed in these Comments
are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all of the individual VGIC member companies or
supporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/).
1

education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to decarbonized transportation
and electric sectors by ensuring the value from EV deployments and flexible EV charging and
discharging is recognized and compensated in support of achieving a more reliable, affordable,
and efficient electric grid.
B. Organization of VGIC’s Comments
VGIC’s comments are organized as follows:
 First, VGIC addresses a specific recommendation from Section 7 of the Draft TEF
posed by the Commission related to IOU roles in pilot programs to evaluate pre-
commercial technologies. In responding to this recommendation, VGIC provides
several recommendations for the Commission’s consideration.
 Second, VGIC addresses several critical questions and recommendations from
Section 8 of the Draft TEF posed by the Commission which pose both material
challenges and opportunities to accelerate transportation electrification. VGIC
provides several recommendations for the Commission’s consideration.
 Finally, VGIC provides a summary of recommendations from its answers to the
questions.
II. COMMENTS ON DRAFT TEF SECTION 7: SAFETY.
A. Section 7.1, Recommendation 4: Consider limited roles for IOU pilot programs to
evaluate pre-commercial technologies and associated safety needs.
VGIC supports the development of a well-balanced, limited role for IOUs in the
evaluation of pre-commercial TE technologies and associated safety needs. IOUs are tasked with
maintaining a safe and reliable grid, which includes the safety needs associated with grid-
2

connected technologies. Deployment of many new grid-connected technologies is inevitable as
California ramps up to achieve its TE goals. As such, it is appropriate for the IOUs, as operators
of the distribution grid, to contribute productively to the evaluation of pre-commercial
technologies in the TE industry and associated safety needs. Several VGI-related technologies
may require safety needs assessments either now or in the future, and VGIC believes IOUs can
and should pursue pilot scale implementation of novel or untested technologies to evaluate their
impacts on grid safety reliability in anticipation of larger scale deployment.2 However, this
testing phase must be well designed to ensure that it is does not impose new barriers technology
deployment at scale. To that end, the Draft TEF states:
“For example, the IOUs may propose pilots to test pre-commercial technologies
that do not fall within existing safety certification systems. Pre-commercial
stationary EVSE prototypes may contain features or configurations that appear
promising but have not yet completed certification by a Nationally Recognized
[Testing] Laboratory (“NRTL”).” 3
VGIC supports IOU involvement in testing pre-commercial technologies, especially
those with configurations not yet certified by a NRTL, as part of pre-commercial technology
demonstrations. In fact, VGIC believes the TE industry would be well-served if IOUs were
obligated to provide this support function, in response to reasonable requests from industry
participants. Thus, VGIC recommends the Commission provide guidance in the TEF that
establishes a uniform program and process by which market participants could request to
conduct pre-commercial technology demonstrations and evaluations alongside IOUs. Such a
2 See, for example, Connect California’s proposal for the use of smart meters for intentional islanding of customers
in advance of a public safety power shutoff event to enable vehicle-to-home backup power solutions. See
Administrative Law Judge’s Ruling Requesting Comments on Track 1 Microgrid and Resiliency Strategies Staff
Proposal January 21, 2020 in R.19-09-009, Attachment A at 14.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M324/K963/324963031.PDF
3 Draft TEF at 74.
3

program can result in stepwise advances in IOU understanding of safety and reliability issues
related to new equipment and technologies developed by vehicles OEMs and EVSE companies.
A standardized pilot program could be created that strikes a balance for IOU
involvement, allowing demonstrable progress to be made without overcommitting IOU
resources. For example, requests for demonstration projects could be capped, such that a given
entity seeking testing and evaluation for a pre-commercial technology/equipment could only
submit a maximum number of projects per year. A cap on the quantity of vehicle or charge ports
could also be explored. As an illustrative example of the standardized pilot approach, a given
OEM might be able to apply for a maximum of two demonstration projects per year or for up to
20 ports in total for demonstrations that deepen IOU understanding of safety and reliability needs
associated with a pre-commercial technology. A budget cap could also be an important
consideration to ensure that standardized pilot requests do not lead to excessive costs to IOU
ratepayers. Any standardized pilot program should also consider how to utilize existing IOU
testing labs for reliability and safety.
The creation of a standardized pilot program should also draw from past or existing
approaches to TE pilots and demonstrations, such as the California Energy Commission’s
(“CEC”) BESTFIT Innovative Charging Solutions solicitation for demonstrating innovative
technologies.4 However, the Commission must also ensure that technologies are not “over-
4 The CEC’s Built-Environment Electrification Solutions & Form Factors for Fitting Infrastructure to Transportation
(“BESTFIT”) Innovative Charging Solutions solicitations will fund projects that demonstrate technologies and
business models that are “best fit” for the local built environment, use case, and vehicle type. Along with the CEC’s
ViGIL Solicitation, which addresses testing, certification, data, and technology gaps for EVSE, BESTFIT may
meaningfully accelerate VGI in California. However, these programs as proposed pose risks of over-piloting
technologies and funding duplicative pilots, and the Commission should consider this aspect of program design to
avoid such risks. See https://www.energy.ca.gov/event/workshop/2020-05/staff-solicitation-scoping-workshop-pre-
solicitation-concept-bestfit and https://www.energy.ca.gov/event/workshop/2020-05/staff-solicitation-scoping-
workshop-pre-solicitation-concept-vehicle-grid
4

piloted,” and that pilot programs do not present a new barrier to commercial scale
implementation. In some instances, IOUs may have a financial interest in limiting certain
customer-sited technologies or use cases from deploying at scale. VGIC is concerned that this
could lead to a scenario where pilot programs are used as a means to delay or constrain market
development beyond the demonstration phase. Thus, VGIC cautions against authorizing
redundant or duplicative pilot programs beyond what is reasonable to understand basic safety
and reliability considerations. Additionally, a standardized pilot program should operate in
coordination with pilot programs administered by the CEC, to further mitigate risks of requiring
redundant or duplicative pilots. The Commission should consider providing guidance on how to
determine whether technologies that have achieved certain milestones, whether through CEC-
funded pilots or the standardized pilot program, can advance to larger scale deployments or
warrant further testing. VGIC recommends that this guidance include processes and metrics to
ensure pilots result in either tangible progress toward commercialization or concrete
recommendations for next steps a pre-commercial technology should take toward market
readiness. Finally, VGIC recommends the initial implementation of this standardized pilot
program framework be focused on safety and near-term strategies to mitigate the impacts of
wildfires and public safety power shutoff (“PSPS”) events.
III. COMMENTS ON DRAFT TEF SECTION 8: TECHNOLOGY AND
STANDARDS.
A. Section 8.1, Question 5: What are the expected costs of requiring vehicle-grid
integration (VGI)-enabled electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) across all
investor-owned utility (IOU) EVSE investments?
5

According to the California Energy Commission (“CEC”) Staff Presentation for the
CALeVIP Future Equipment Technology Workshop, deploying VGI-enabled EVSE may amount
to de minimus incremental costs at scale, costing $5 to $25 per EVSE.5 VGIC supports the notion
of encouraging IOU EVSE investments to include some form of VGI functionality to maximize
the value of these assets. However, VGIC cautions against making this a requirement for IOU
EVSE deployments absent a clear definition of “VGI-enabled.”
B. Section 8.1, Question 5(a): What are the projected costs of requiring all ratepayer
funded EVSE meet International Organization for Standardization (ISO) standard
15118, and aligning with the protocol updates currently underway?
The Draft TEF’s second recommendation in Section 8.1 is to:
“Require that EVSE funded through [IOUs’] transportation electrification (TE)
programs contain networking capabilities and can implement International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) standard 15118 and other communication
enabling requirements adopted by the California Energy Commission.”
We reiterate that, at this time, the CEC is only considering ISO 15118 for publicly-
accessible EV chargers funded through the CALeVIP program. VGIC believes the projected
costs of requiring all ratepayer funded EVSE meet ISO 15118 are significantly higher than the
incremental $5 - $25 per EVSE finding referenced above, as the opportunity cost resulting from
such a mandate would be significant. Two primary factors contribute to this potentially high
opportunity cost:
1. The current state of the ISO 15118 standard
5 CEC Docket 17-EVI-01 https://efiling.energy.ca.gov/GetDocument.aspx?tn=230794&DocumentContentId=62410
6

The Draft TEF notes “the standard is under review and not fully implemented in the US
yet.” 6 ISO 15118-20, the specific standard with which market actors are being asked to comply,
is not a complete standard, and may not be until 2021 or later, and therefore mandated
compliance for IOU EVSE may stall expeditious progress on TE efforts in California. The Draft
TEF correctly states that some auto manufacturers (“OEMs”) have “indicated they intend to
deploy ISO 15118 as a communication solution…and generally do not want to support multiple
protocols.”7 However, requiring all ratepayer funded EVSE to meet ISO 15118 is premature and
unwarranted given the current state of the standard.
The Draft TEF states the Energy Division Staff “finds that establishing a standard
communication pathway could send a strong signal to the EVSE market that public charging
stations deployed in California must be capable of these types of functions.”8 However, by
requiring compliance with an incomplete standard to participate in IOU TE programs, VGIC
believes the Commission would instead send a signal that restricts, rather than accelerates VGI
market development. TE deployment may be stalled as some EVSE manufacturers wait for the
standard to be complete before developing products. Others may exit the California market in
favor of a less restrictive marketplace. It is worth noting that VGIC does not believe
communications protocols require regulatory intervention to advance the marketplace in a
common direction. This contrasts with the situation the EV industry faced in recent years
regarding physical form factors for charging devices, which benefited from more direct
intervention.
6 Draft TEF at 82.
7 Draft TEF at 83.
8 Draft TEF at 84.
7

VGIC members and supporters have encountered EVSE manufacturers that have delayed
entrance into the California marketplace over concerns that the ISO 15118 standard will be
required. For some, their business model, which may leverage pathways that render ISO 15118
unnecessary, could be made infeasible because of the proposed requirement. Through this lens,
the opportunity cost associated with a contraction in available EVSE suppliers could have a
significant impact on competition in the space, which in turn impacts the ability to provide VGI
solutions through the most innovative and cost-effective means. VGIC strongly urges the
Commission remain open to the concerns of the broader VGI industry and the practical, ground-
truthing perspectives that industry participants can provide.
2. The current state of the VGI market
The proposal to require ISO 15118 does not consider the level of appropriateness that one
standard may provide for a given use case. There exists a wealth of resources, including
California ratepayer-funded research and stakeholder reports, such as the recently filed VGI
Working Group Final Report9, that supports the following hypothesis: California’s transportation
and electric sector decarbonization goals require the implementation of a diverse set of VGI
functionalities and use cases. The ISO 15118 standard is a communications protocol that can
enable important VGI functions and use cases, but it does not constitute a functionality or a use
case on its own. Furthermore, ISO 15118 is not necessarily the best fit for all VGI use cases
across all customer segments and charging levels. If the Commission were to require ISO 15118
functionality for all EVSE at this time, it will likely bypass opportunities to save customers
money, reduce rates, support the grid, and/or reduce greenhouse gas (“GHG”) emissions that
may be achieved with existing or emerging functionalities and communication protocols. Thus,
9 See VGI WG Final Report, filed in R.18-12-006 on June 30, 2020 at 7. https://gridworks.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/07/VGI-Working-Group-Final-Report-6.30.20.pdf
8

there is an opportunity cost of unknown scale associated with focusing on one communications
protocol or standard rather than focusing on achieving specific VGI use cases some of which
might be delivered through more than one protocol. Furthermore, by imposing a standard on all
segments, use cases, and charging levels, regardless of which business model may work most
cost-efficiently for each, the requirement for ISO 15118 compliance in all IOU EVSE would
directly impede the implementation of SB 676, which calls for strategies that maximize the use
of cost-effective VGI.
The 2017 Staff VGI Communication Protocols Working Group Report determined that
“markets, protocols, and technology are rapidly developing and at this time we do not want to
preclude any protocols or use cases that can deliver VGI value.”10 These domains continue to
evolve at a rapid pace, and requirements that unnecessarily stifle progress represent significant
barriers to achieving TE, VGI, decarbonization, and economic growth goals.
Furthermore, the Draft TEF states that the CEC has proposed a similar requirement for
EVSE supported by the CALeVIP program beginning in 2021.11 However, CALeVIP funding is
only available to publicly-accessible chargers, while the Draft TEF proposes IOU roles for
applications other than publicly-accessible chargers.12 The Draft TEF further explains that a
standard communication pathway is needed to “send a strong signal…that public charging
stations deployed in California must be capable of these types of functions.”13 VGIC believes
this further conflates publicly-accessible chargers with ratepayer-funded chargers. It is important
to note that the Draft TEF Section 4 on IOU Roles does not propose limiting potential IOU
10 VGI Communication Protocol Working Group Energy Division Staff Report, October 2018
https://www.cpuc.ca.gov/WorkArea/DownloadAsset.aspx?id=6442460144 at 18.
11 Draft TEF at 83.
12 Draft TEF at 33-42.
13 Draft TEF at 84.
9

EVSE to publicly-accessible charging stations. Therefore, VGIC does not believe that the desire
to have standardization among publicly-accessible charging stations constitutes a reasonable
justification for the proposed requirement that all IOU EVSE, regardless of use case, meet a
particular standard.
VGIC believes that the deployment of VGI-enabled EVs and EVSE should be generally
encouraged, but cautions against over-prescriptive mandates. To avoid commoditization of
devices, and allow innovation to continue, VGIC prefers minimum functionalities that enable
EVSEs to facilitate some set of appropriate use cases. This preference was revealed by the
Commission in its May 31, 2018 Decision on the Transportation Electrification Standard
Review Projects (D. 18-05-040), which found “Networked L2” charging can enable VGI services
and rates.14 Rather than mandating use of a specific standard, Ordering Paragraph (“OP”) 10 of
D. 18-05-040 states:
“SDG&E must conduct an ongoing Requests for Qualifications to qualify L2 EVSE and
corresponding network services from which participating customers can choose. SDG&E
should ensure all qualified L2 EVSE are networked, include metering capabilities, and
are NRTL certified.”15
This language directed the IOU to focus on minimum functionalities (i.e., networked, metering
capabilities), rather than requiring the EVSE to meet a specific standard. VGIC urges the
Commission to act in accordance with the precedent set in D. 18-05-040, by continuing to focus
on generally ensuring minimum capabilities, rather than implementing a specific standard.
VGIC recommends the Commission explore levers to promote VGI strategies through the TEF
and beyond that are based on best practices in clean energy and transportation policy design.
14 Decision on the Transportation Electrification Standard Review Projects (D.18-05-040) May 31, 2018 in
Application of San Diego Gas & Electric Company (U 902E) for Approval of SB 350 Transportation Electrification
Proposals (A.17-01-020) And Related Matters (A.17-01-021; A.17-01-022) at 137.
15 Ibid at 154.
10

Programs aimed toward accomplishing identified outcomes by incentivizing the adoption and
use of VGI functionalities and use cases, such as the 320 identified in the VGI Working Group
Final Report as “able to provide value now”16, are likely to be far more effective levers than
those requiring EVs and EVSE be compliant with specific standards.
C. Section 8.1, Question 6: How can IOUs account for and/or project the scale of vehicle-
to-grid enabled EVs in their service territories within their TEPs?
VGIC posits that the scale of V2G-enabled EVs may not be the most valuable metric for
IOU TEPs to track and project. It may be more valuable to understand the scale of V2G-enabled
EVSE that exist in an IOU’s service territory, as EVs can only export power via compatible
EVSE, and at or below the kW rating of that EVSE. IOUs can account for V2G Direct Current
(“V2G DC”) EVSE by tracking interconnections under Rule 21. For V2G Alternating Current
(“V2G AC”), there may exist several data collection pathways to account for future deployment;
however, without a viable interconnection pathway it is unclear whether an EVSE capable of
V2G AC can or should be tracked.
VGIC also questions whether the scale of V2G-enabled systems is as relevant or valuable
in IOU TEPs as the scale of V2G-enabled systems that actually discharge or otherwise
participate in providing V2G functionality. For example, if V2G-enabled systems were widely
deployed without adequate tariffs, programs, or market pathways by which to monetize V2G
services, a measurement of V2G-enabled systems could provide a false indication of an IOU TE
program’s success (or potential success) in encouraging beneficial V2G operations. Thus, VGIC
recommends the Commission require TEPs track and project V2G participation rather than just
16 See VGI WG Final Report, filed in R.18-12-006 on June 30, 2020 at 8. https://gridworks.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/07/VGI-Working-Group-Final-Report-6.30.20.pdf
11

capability. One potential data collection pathway for tracking this V2G activity may be
measuring customer participation in relevant V2G rates or programs, including any credits or
incentive payments provided to customers. This is consistent with some of the VGI-specific
metrics considered during the VGI Working Group.
D. Section 8.1, Question 6(a): Without existing interconnection standards, how can
vehicle-to-grid (V2G) technology be tested and scaled?
V2G technology has been tested several times in California for technical feasibility,
economic viability, and operational considerations.17 It is also important to note that there are
existing interconnection standards relevant to V2G DC. As mentioned in the Draft TEF, the Rule
21 Working Group 3 (R.17-07-007) achieved consensus that Rule 21 – as currently written –
sufficiently addresses the V2G DC configuration wherein the inverter is placed inside the EVSE
and remains stationary.18 Additionally, it is worth noting that some existing EV models with
bidirectional capabilities (specifically the Nissan Leaf) have already been widely deployed at
scale in California and could provide grid services through a V2G DC configuration in the very
near term.
Without modifications to the existing interconnection process required under Rule 21,
VGIC does not foresee a pathway for V2G AC technology to reach scale. This is due to onerous
requirements imposed by two separate, misaligned, and potentially opposing regulatory
environments in the electricity and transportation sectors. Specifically, the present UL 1741
standard required under Rule 21 is not designed for vehicles and is not practical to incorporate
17 See, for example, Electric Vehicle Storage Accelerator (EVSA), Intelligent Electric Vehicle Integration
(INVENT), Marine Corps Air Station (MCAS) Miramar V2G Microgrid
18 Working Group Three Final Report June 14, 2019 in R. 17-07-007 at 61.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M309/K943/309943907.PDF
12

into typical vehicle manufacturing processes. Instead of third party certification, manufacturers
rely on a robust process of self-certification to meet the requirements of the regulatory body that
oversees automotive product safety outcomes – namely the National Highway Safety Traffic
Administration (“NHTSA”). To be clear, the process of self-certification to NHTSA is not a
form a “self-regulation” but rather, it reflects strict requirements imposed upon the manufacturer
for safety performance and functionality (with severe risks and penalties if these are not met).
Under a self-certification approach, the automotive industry is held accountable for meeting
certain safety and performance outcomes even in conditions where no standards exist and third-
party certification is not possible. Moreover, the NHTSA’s regulatory authority is not limited
explicitly to driver and passenger safety and as such, its regulatory actions could extend into
issues affecting grid safety and reliability. Thus, manufactures are already compelled to ensure
their products will not jeopardize those issues. However, we recognize that additional clarity and
certainty could aid in the process of gaining trust in the self-certification approach. As such,
VGIC has identified several potential pathways that the Commission could pursue to resolve this
issue while preserving the ability for OEMs to use self-certification. These pathways were
outlined in VGIC’s January 6, 2020 comments in response to the V2G AC Subgroup Report and
include:
 A CPUC Validation Process
 A Federal Validation Process
 An IOU Uniform Data Request
 Allowing UL 9741 as the Relevant Third-Party Standard
13

 Establishing OEMs as NRTLs19
Several of these pathways contemplate a validated process by which OEMs continue to self-
certify to an overseeing regulatory body. This largely builds upon the industry’s standard
practices for testing, inspection, and compliance with health and safety standards at the existing
regulatory body for the transportation sector (i.e. NHTSA), as detailed above.
It is important to note the severity of risk for not meeting safety and functionality
requirements currently imposed on OEMs. Any vehicle can be recalled for a retroactive design
change or even removed from the market if there is an indication of a problem. Additionally,
anyone can report product issues with NHTSA. Therefore, it is in the best interest of the OEMs
to avoid safety performance issues, and they are inclined to operate within severe safety limits
(including grid safety) to ensure the health and safety of their customers.
Given the current NHTSA regulatory framework and the underlying risks and incentives
for OEMs, requiring third-party certification for V2G AC configurations will likely create
duplicative and potentially opposing or unworkable regulatory processes. As long as third-party
certification is required for interconnection, it will serve as a barrier to scaling VGI.
Some of VGIC’s recommended self-certification pathways rely upon SAE standards and
testing protocols that are currently in the process of being updated. At the time that VGIC’s
January 6, 2020 comments were written, it was anticipated that these updates to the SAE
standards and protocols for V2G AC systems would be ready in the July 2020 timeframe and
could help inform further development of appropriate V2G interconnection pathways. Due to
19 Comments of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council on Vehicle to Grid Alternating Current Interconnection
Subgroup Report (January 6, 2020) in R. 18-12-006 at 5-7.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M328/K685/328685720.PDF
14

COVID-19, these updates have been delayed by approximately 2-3 months. VGIC intends to
provide additional details to inform the Commission of the progress on these updates in its Reply
Comments. However, even as these updates progress, VGIC believes there are steps that the
Commission could be contemplating now to facilitate a viable path for V2G AC interconnection
at scale. Specifically, upon completion of the relevant SAE standards, the Commission should
host a workshop to revisit the gaps listed in the V2G AC subgroup report.
There also exist bi-directional charging configurations that do not require interconnection
standards, such as those capable of providing backup power to temporarily islanded customers.
These can be scaled through the deployment of enabling technology and the development of
necessary programs to allow customers to be intentionally islanded ahead of a PSPS event.20
VGIC urges the Commission direct IOUs to implement solutions that enable bi-directional
charging to mitigate the impacts of PSPS events.
Additionally, scaling any bi-directional program, whether subject to interconnection
standards or strictly occurring in situations where customers or segments of the grid are safely
islanded, could provide incremental testing and IOU evaluation of bi-directional systems to
deepen IOU understanding of the technology. VGIC believes IOU familiarity and experience
with bi-directional systems can help build trust and comfort with the technology, which is
needed to alleviate barriers to interconnection and widespread adoption of bi-directional systems.
E. Section 8.2, Question 6(b): How should V2G EVs, which can serve power back onto
the grid, be forecasted differently than load-only EVs in IOU planning processes
20 See, for example, Connect California’s proposal for the use of smart meters for intentional islanding of customers
in advance of a public safety power shutoff event to enable vehicle-to-home backup power solutions. See
Administrative Law Judge’s Ruling Requesting Comments on Track 1 Microgrid and Resiliency Strategies Staff
Proposal January 21, 2020 in R.19-09-009, Attachment A at 14.
15

VGIC recognizes and appreciates the challenging nature of this question and the
implications V2G forecasting decisions are likely to have on IOU planning processes in the
future. VGIC posits there are two resource classifications to consider:
“Base case” EVs are load-only EVs with predictable charging profiles. These base case
EVs should continue to be forecasted as modifications to load. Meanwhile, VGIC recommends
that the VGI functionality of VGI-enabled EVs should be treated as a resource in IOU planning
processes. More specifically, V1G resources – those shifting or modulating charging time, level,
or location – can meet IOU needs that may result from their load forecasts, including needs
stemming from any projected growth of base case EVs. This is analogous to treating Demand
Response as a resource. Similarly, V2G resources – EVs capable of bi-directional power flow –
closely resemble other bi-directional DERs, such as behind-the-meter energy storage, and can
provide output to the grid at critical times. Therefore V2G should also be included as a resource
(rather than a load modifier) in any forecast used to help determine IOU loads, resources, and
resource needs.
In addition, both pilots and scaled implementation of V2G systems are required to better
understand customer behavior, including responsiveness to price signals or programs that incent
V2G exports. VGIC recommends the Commission continue to authorize innovative V2G pilots
and programs that contribute to stakeholders’ collective understanding of EV charging and
discharging profiles from learned experience.
F. Section 8.1, Recommendation 2: Require that EVSE funded through their TE
programs contain networking capabilities and can implement ISO standard 15118 and
other communication enabling requirements adopted by the CEC.
16

VGIC strongly opposes the proposed requirement for all IOU EVSE to implement
specific communication standards. As detailed above in VGIC’s response to Question 5(a),
requiring the implementation of a single protocol or combination of protocols at this time would
pose a significant barrier to VGI market development and broader TE deployment. Different
communication protocols enable different business models, and requiring a specific protocol or
combination of protocols will limit the overall value of VGI to the state of California.
VGIC strongly urges the Commission not to adopt Recommendation 2 and instead, direct
IOUs to propose strategies and planned investments to promote VGI use cases and
functionalities. These planned investments should incorporate marketing, education, and
outreach efforts to generate customer demand for VGI services. Additionally, IOUs should
propose a suite of up-front incentives, performance-based incentives, and other programs in their
TEPs that would encourage the deployment of EVSE with VGI capabilities.
G. Section 8.3, Question 5: Should the Rule 15/16 exemption that has been offered to
residential customers for over ten years be made permanent, or should other revisions
to the IOUs’ rules be made to help socialize the cost of upstream upgrades that may be
triggered by new residential electric vehicle load?
VGIC believes that a more targeted application of the Rule 15/16 exemption should be
considered through the lens of historical and expected upgrade costs that are incurred due to
“non-program” EV charging load and pursuant to the IOUs’ typical business practices. The
three IOUs’ most recent EV Infrastructure Cost Report (formerly the Load Research Report)
filed April 1, 2020 reports on the following 2019 upgrade costs across the three IOUs:
17

Table 1. Summary Stats for Selected 2019 EV Impact Costs ($)21
Residential Non-Residential Total
Total Distribution System Costs
Incurred by Utility for Upgrades 41,119 1,354,578 1,395,697
Total Service Line costs Incurred by
Utility for Upgrades 90,933 2,579,652 2,670,584
Total Utility side costs
588,702 4,099,614 4,688,317
Total Customer Costs
8,013 491,565 499,578
These data suggest that the annual upgrade cost burden of non-program EV upgrades is
relatively modest, even before considering the offsetting impact of new EV charging revenue,
and that the majority of upgrade costs occur for non-residential segments. These data of course
reflect the early days of the market, in which most of the vehicle electrification to date has been
centered around light-duty vehicles. We should anticipate that these figures will grow in
lockstep with increased deployment, and especially once medium- and heavy-duty charging gets
integrated into the system in earnest.
VGIC thus believes it is prudent to extend the residential exemption for above-allowance
distribution upgrades as a simple way to continue to reduce barriers to EV adoption in the near
term. However, in anticipation of adoption ramping up over the next decade and across vehicle
classes – and ideally as part of a holistic examination of how all customer segments can receive
streamlined access to the provision of EV infrastructure – the Commission should begin to
21 Compliance Filing of San Diego Gas & Electric Company (U 902 E), Southern California Edison Company (U
338 E) and Pacific Gas and Electric Company (U 93 E) Pursuant to Ordering Paragraph 2 of Decision 16-06-011
(EV Infrastructure Cost Report), filed April 1, 2020. Data compiled from Table 3 in Attachments 1, 2, and 3. Data
assumptions and methodologies for these categories differed between IOUs, as described in pages 7-19. Note that
change in methodologies and sectors for this report also renders difficult year-by-year comparisons with previous
years’ Load Research Reports that solely focused on residential upgrade costs (e.g., PG&E description found in
Section 4 of page 11).
18

consider the role of VGI in limiting the occurrence of ratepayer-funded upgrade costs in the first
place. The potential for VGI solutions to limit the occurrence of upgrade costs is explored in the
VGI Working Group Final Report, which describes 320 VGI use cases as “able to provide value
by 2022”. Many of the use cases considered high-value focus specifically on distribution system
upgrade deferral.22
A straightforward mechanism to mitigate costly distribution system upgrades would be to
offer customers tariff-based solutions that promote VGI capabilities, such as a tariff that enables
customer choice of Automated Load Management technologies to ensure site capacity, as
measured at the Point of Common Coupling, stays within certain limits and avoids the need to
upgrade primary or secondary infrastructure. Such an offering would support the deployment and
utilization of the flexible charging capabilities of EVs and networked EVSE and would mitigate
the ratepayer impact of the state’s deployment of EV infrastructure.
H. Section 8.4, General Comment:
VGIC recommends the Commission convene a workshop to discuss the next steps for the
Revised Strawman for EV Submetering Protocol, to ensure that the protocol practically enables
the marketplace for third-party submetering technologies. Submetering provides the lowest-cost
means to maximize customer choice of time-varying and dynamic rates for EV charging and
enables a wide variety of configurations for flexible EV charging and discharging to provide
services in different energy markets.
22 See VGI WG Final Report, filed in R.18-12-006 on June 30, 2020 at 8. https://gridworks.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/07/VGI-Working-Group-Final-Report-6.30.20.pdf
19

A. Section 8.5, Recommendation 6: Consider requiring IOUs to consult with the CEC,
Energy Division staff and other stakeholders to propose an emerging technology
program scope and budget.
VGIC strongly supports this recommendation. Well-coordinated support for emerging TE
and VGI technologies is needed to further develop the pipeline of technologies that will lead the
way to California’s decarbonized energy and transportation future. The standardized pilot
program approach VGIC proposed in Section II of these comments should be considered as one
component of an overarching emerging technologies program scope.
IV. SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS.
In responding to the questions above, VGIC proposes several recommendations, which can be
summarized as follows:
Section 7
 Based on existing IOU labs and lessons learned from CEC solicitations, a
standardized pilot program should be implemented to test pre-commercial
technologies for basic safety and reliability considerations. VGIC proposes a
balanced approach that could meet the needs of IOUs and industry participants
alike while maintaining progress toward statewide TE goals.
Section 8
 VGIC supports the notion of encouraging IOU EVSE investments to include
some form of VGI functionality to maximize the value of these assets. However,
VGIC cautions against making this a requirement for IOU EVSE deployments
absent a clear definition of “VGI-enabled.”
 The requirement for all IOU EVSE to implement a specific communication
standard should not be adopted. Implementing such a mandate would incur
opportunity costs of an unknown scale as it effectively bypasses opportunities to
20

save customers money, reduce rates, support the grid, and/or reduce GHG
emissions. VGIC instead recommends levers to incentivize the adoption and use
of VGI functionalities and use cases, rather than pursue compliance with specific
standards.
 V2G activity could be accounted for and/or projected within TEPs by tracking
interconnected V2G-compatible EVSE and measuring customer participation in
V2G incentives, rates, and/or programs.
 “Base case” EVs should be forecasted as load, while V1G and V2G resources
should be treated as available resource options within IOU planning processes.
For V2G resources, this aligns with current best practices for behind-the-meter
stationary energy storage.
 While V2G DC systems can currently interconnect under Rule 21, the
Commission should reconvene the V2G AC subgroup upon standard development
organizations’ completion/revision of the relevant standards.
 Bi-directional charging configurations that do not require interconnection, such as
those intended to provide backup power to temporarily islanded customers,
should be pursued.
 A targeted application of the Rule 15/16 exemption should be considered to
capture the flexibility VGI strategies can offer. VGIC recommends the adoption
of a straightforward mechanism to mitigate costly distribution system upgrades,
for example through an Advanced Load Management tariff that enables customer
choice.
 The Commission should convene a workshop to discuss the next steps for the
Revised Strawman for EV Submetering Protocol to ensure that the protocol
adequately enables a marketplace third-party submetering technologies, which
can lower cost, increase customer choice, and lift existing barriers to VGI
strategies.
 VGIC supports the recommendation for a well-coordinated emerging technology
program scope and budget and recommends additional coordination with VGIC’s
Section 7 recommendation for a standardized pilot program.
21

V. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit these opening comments on the Safety,
Technology, and Standards sections of the Draft TEF. We look forward to further collaboration
with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
Edward Burgess
Policy Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400
Berkeley, California 94704
Telephone: (941) 266-0017
Email: eburgess@vgicouncil.org
Date: July 14, 2020
22