BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking Regarding Policies, Rulemaking 20-05-012
Procedures and Rules for the Self-Generation (Filed May 28, 2020)
Incentive Program and Related Issues
MOTION FOR PARTY STATUS OF VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION
COUNCIL
Edward Burgess
Policy Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400
Berkeley, California 94704
Telephone: (941) 266-0017
Email: eburgess@vgicouncil.org
July 27, 2020
1

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking Regarding Policies, Rulemaking 20-05-012
Procedures and Rules for the Self-Generation (Filed May 28, 2020)
Incentive Program and Related Issues
MOTION FOR PARTY STATUS OF VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION
COUNCIL
I. Introduction
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”)1 respectfully moves for party status in
this proceeding in accordance with Section 1.4 of the California Public Utilities Commission
(“Commission”) Rules of Practice and Procedure.
II. Interest in this Proceeding
VGIC is a 501(c)6 membership-based advocacy group committed to advancing the role
of electric vehicles (“EV”) and vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”) through policy development,
education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to a decarbonized transportation
and electric sector by ensuring the value from EV deployments and flexible EV charging and
discharging is recognized and compensated in support of achieving a more reliable, affordable,
and efficient electric grid.
VGIC and its member companies are engaged in developing and deploying technologies
that could be directly impacted by the Rulemaking (R.) 20-05-012. Specifically, our member
companies are focused on VGI applications that include bi-directional systems (charging and
discharging) to leverage the utilization of an EV’s embedded mobile energy storage capacity
(including batteries or fuel cells) for a number of near-term use cases. VGIC members and
supporters have already developed, demonstrated, and publicly reported on vehicles and
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., Connect California LLC, Enel
X North America, Inc., Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, Ford Motor Company, General Motors Company, Nissan North
America, Inc., Nuvve Corporation, and Toyota Motor North America, Inc. The views expressed in these Comments
are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all of the individual VGIC member companies or
supporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/).
2

charging equipment with advanced VGI capabilities, and plan to continue development of
production-ready vehicles and charging equipment. We believe that these capabilities are
strongly aligned with the purpose and goals of the Self-Generation Incentive Program (“SGIP”)
program, including GHG emissions reduction, resiliency, and equity. As such, the SGIP
technology eligibility policies, procedures, and rules that are being considered in this proceeding
are of great interest to the VGIC.
While VGIC firmly believes that a broad set of bi-directional VGI solutions could
ultimately be considered eligible under the SGIP framework, at this time we believe that it is
appropriate for a very limited subset of high priority bi-directional solutions to be included in the
immediate scope of the instant proceeding. Specifically, VGIC would like to focus on the
opportunities for bi-directional VGI solutions that provide backup power to customers impacted
by Public Safety Power Shutoffs (“PSPS”). These solutions have the potential to complement the
suite of other eligible SGIP technologies in providing clean, safe, and affordable backup power
that are or could be deployed in the very near term to aid larger resiliency efforts within the SGIP
equity-resiliency framework. This would also provide critical demonstrations for VGI
technologies that would yield learnings and spillover benefits for other applications.
As such, VGIC is interested in commenting on the preliminary list of issues in scope,
including the “consideration of EVs or EV supply equipment (“EVSE”) as eligible technologies,
beyond existing SGIP processes.” 2
The outcome of decisions made in this proceeding related to these issues may have
material impact on the products and services developed by VGIC member companies and
supporters. VGIC requests party status in order to contribute to the near-term development of
SGIP rules which could allow bi-directional VGI solutions to support resiliency goals.
VGIC recognizes that technical considerations and pilot opportunities for the use of bi-
directional VGI backup power solutions and to provide near-term relief to EV customers
vulnerable to Public Safety Power Shutoffs (“PSPS”) are actively being discussed in Track 2 of
the Microgrids and Resiliency Strategies Proceeding (R.19-09-009). However, VGIC believes
that the SGIP program objectives are particularly well-aligned with the benefits VGI backup
2 ALJ Email Ruling Noticing July 29, 2020 Pre-Hearing Conference (PHC) and Providing PHC Guidance, July 17, 2020
3

solutions have to offer.3 VGIC also notes that the VGI resilience solutions being contemplated
are a form of bidirectional storage that are distinct from “V1G” smart charging, which we do not
recommend to be considered in scope at this time.
VGIC and its members companies and supporters are interested in developing market
pathways for these high-value backup power solutions, and we want to ensure that industry
perspectives are sufficiently represented. VGIC intends to provide a formal oral statement during
the upcoming Prehearing Conference scheduled for July 29, 2020. In addition, VGIC plans to
actively participate in subsequent actions within this proceeding.
III. Notice
Service of notices, orders, and other correspondence in this proceeding should be directed
to VGIC at the address set forth below:
Edward Burgess
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400
Berkeley, California 94704
Tel: (501) 655-7811
E-mail: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
IV. Conclusion
VGIC’s participation in this proceeding will not prejudice any party and will not delay
the schedule or broaden the scope of the issues in the proceeding. For the reasons stated above,
VGIC respectfully requests that the CPUC grant this Motion for Party Status filing.
Dated: July 27, 2020
Respectfully submitted,
3 California Public Utilities Commission, “Staff Proposal for Facilitating the Commercialization of Microgrids
Pursuant to Senate Bill 1339” 23-27, Proposal 5: Direct Utilities to Conduct Pilot Studies of Low-cost, Reliable
Electrical Isolation Methods. https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M344/K038/344038386.PDF
4

Edward Burgess
Policy Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
Tel: (501) 655-7811
E-mail: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
5