D.P.U. 21-90: Comments of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
on Eversource’s Proposed Phase II EV Infrastructure Program
I. Introduction
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)1 is a 501(c)(6) membership-based trade
association committed to advancing the role of electric vehicles (EVs) and vehicle-grid
integration (VGI) through policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports
the transition to decarbonized transportation and electric sectors by ensuring the value from EV
deployments and flexible EV charging and discharging is recognized and compensated in
support of achieving a more reliable, affordable, and efficient electric grid. VGIC appreciates the
opportunity to provide comments to the Department of Public Utilities (DPU) on Eversource’s
proposed Phase II EV Infrastructure Program.
II. EV Time-of-Use (TOU) Rates are Needed to Support Massachusetts’s
Transportation Electrification (TE) Efforts
Managed charging or “V1G” is an important tool to support TE efforts, as it shifts EV
charging away from on-peak periods, which can help lower overall charging costs and support
the grid. EV TOU rates are one of the most effective V1G strategies to shift EV charging. While
an offering like National Grid’s Off-Peak Charging Rebate can provides an incentive for
customers to shift charging, time-varying EV rates can unlock a far greater level of load
flexibility from EVs.
For example, with a potential 3 cents/kWh off-peak charging incentive, a residential
customer in the Greater Boston area receiving delivery service and fixed price supply from
Eversource would pay 23.612 or 24.654 cents/kWh for on-peak charging, and 20.612 or 21.654
cents/kWh for off-peak charging (depending on the season), resulting in an approximate 1.14:1
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., dcbel, Enel X North America,
Inc., Fermata, LLC., FlexCharging, Inc., Ford Motor Company, General Motors Company, Nissan North America, Inc.,
Nuvve Corporation, Stellantis N.V., The Mobility House, Toyota Motor North America, Inc., and Veloce Energy, Inc.
The views expressed in these comments are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all individual
VGIC member companies or supporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/).
1

differential between on- and off-peak charging rates.2 For comparison, Pacific Gas & Electric’s
EV-B rate offers a 4:1 on- and off-peak differential,3 while Xcel Energy Minnesota’s A08 –
Residential EV Service offers a roughly 4:1 to 5:1 differential.4 A similarly designed EV TOU
rate would present more dynamic price signals and more effectively encourage customers to shift
EV charging away from on-peak periods. Notably, the proposed demand charge alternative is not
a load management strategy and therefore is not a substitute for such EV TOU rates.
In addition, an off-peak charging incentive may not be a sustainable mechanism to
encourage beneficial charging behavior. While a rebate for off-peak charging would be an
acceptable first step in exploring financial incentives for off-peak charging, its continuation is
dependent upon subsequent funding decisions by the Department. On the other hand, EV TOU
rates can be designed to be revenue neutral and appropriately recover utility costs, and thus do
not require additional ratepayer funding. EV TOU rates are a necessary long-term tariff offering,
and VGIC urges the Department to direct Eversource to file proposals for EV TOU rates for
residential and commercial customers 6 months from the approval of its proposed Phase II EV
Program. In addition, VGIC believes the development of EV TOU rates could be informed by
charging data collected from National Grid’s Off-Peak Charging Rebate program.
III. Submetering via EV supply equipment (EVSE) and vehicle telematics should be
used to support billing for EV TOU rates
The absence of advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) need not delay progress on EV
TOU rates, as existing EVs and EV supply equipment (EVSE) are capable of measuring charging
for the purposes of billing. To unlock this capability, EV TOU rates, off-peak charging incentives,
and any other TE incentive related to charging behavior should allow submetering via the EVSE
or vehicle telematics. While both National Grid and Eversource have expressed concerns over
metering accuracy related to using smart chargers and vehicle telematics, VGIC notes that these
2 Using rates R-1 delivery rates from https://www.eversource.com/content/docs/default-source/rates-tariffs/ema-
greater-boston-rates.pdf?sfvrsn=c27ef362_54 and fixed supply rates from
https://www.eversource.com/content/ema-c/residential/my-account/billing-payments/about-your-bill/rates-
tariffs/electric-supply-rates
3 PG&E. Electric Vehicle Rate Plans. https://www.pge.com/en_US/residential/rate-plans/rate-plan-
options/electric-vehicle-base-plan/electric-vehicle-base-plan.page. Pacific Gas & Electric’s EV-B rate includes
charges of 56 cents/kWh during on-peak periods and 14 cents/kWh during off-peak periods – a 4:1 on- and off-
peak differential.
4 Xcel Energy Minnesota Electric Rate Book. Rate Code A08.
https://www.xcelenergy.com/staticfiles/xn/Regulatory%20&%20Resource%20Planning/Minnesota/Me_Section_5.
pdf. Xcel Energy Minnesota’s A08 – Residential EV Service includes charges of 16.508-20.497 cents/kWh during
on-peak periods and 4.170 cents/kWh during off-peak periods – a 3.96:1 to 4.92:1 differential.
2

potential issues are based on flawed and out-of-date studies and less paramount than the benefits
that these technologies can deliver. In fact, EVSE and vehicle telematics submetering capabilities
are found in commercially available products and are in use today. Notably, FERC recently
approved the CAISO’s methodology for EVSE submetering.5 Xcel Energy Minnesota has
implemented the Residential EV Service Pilot since 2018, using the metering capability of smart
chargers to allow residential customers to enroll in EV TOU rates, and the Pilot was made a
permanent program offering in 2020.6 The Department itself has also directed National Grid and
Eversource’s proposals for demand charge alternatives to allow EV charging data for billing
purposes to be collected via smart or networked chargers and EV telematics.7
Enabling EV- or EVSE-based submetering approaches help avoid the cost of a second
meter, which may be borne by the customer or socialized to all of a given utility’s customers -
however, either approach would disproportionately impact low-income customers. For instance,
allowing submetering through the charger has helped participants in Xcel Minnesota’s Residential
EV Service Pilot save an average $2,196 each in upfront costs.8 Furthermore, Eversource is already
proposing to provide rebates for customers installing networked Level 2 EVSE,9 and networked
EVSE and vehicle telematics are already used by National Grid and Eversource to enable EVs to
participate in the Active Demand Reduction demand response program10. It would be a missed
opportunity if such capabilities are not fully leveraged to support billing for EV TOU rates as well.
As such, VGIC strongly recommends the Department direct Eversource to develop EV TOU rates
that offer customers the option to elect EV- and EVSE-based measurement in lieu of installing a
separate meter.
IV. Automated Load Management (ALM) Should be Enabled and Incorporated into
Fleet Assessment Services and EV Ready Site Plans
Automated Load Management (“ALM”) is the use of software or other behind-the-meter
technologies to strategically share charging capacity across multiple charging ports at the same
charging site, helping safely connect multiple charging ports whose total nameplate load would
5 Order Accepting Tariff Revisions issued on September 30, 2020 in Docket No. 20-2443-000 at 8.
http://www.caiso.com/Documents/Sep30-2020-
LetterOrderAcceptingEnergyStorageandDistributedEnergyResourceStakeholderESDERPhase3-ER20-2443.pdf
6 Minnesota PUC. October 6, 2020. Order Approving EV Home Service and Voluntary EV Charger Service
Programs as Modified. Docket 19-559.
7 DPU 20-69-A, pg. 42. 2021.
8 Xcel Energy Minnesota. 2020. Annual EV Report, pg. 11-12. Docket 17-817.
9 Eversource Exhibit NG-EVPP-1. Docket 21-91.
10 Massachusetts Three-Year Energy Efficiency Plan 2019-2021, Appendix K. https://ma-eeac.org/wp-
content/uploads/Exh.-1-Final-Plan-10-31-18-With-Appendices-no-bulk.pdf
3

otherwise exceed the rated capacity of the customer connection. By using ALM, customers can
avoid or defer the need to upgrade certain distribution system infrastructure to accommodate the
new EV charging load. For example, if a multi-unit dwelling seeks to deploy a charging station
with 5 ports, each with a 10-kW capacity, the distribution upgrades would normally be sized to
accommodate 50 kW of incremental coincidental charging demand, equal to all 5 ports charging
at full capacity. However, ALM can lower the coincident charging demand to below 50 kW even
when all 5 ports are occupied, thus reducing distribution system upgrades to what is required for
only 3 or 4 ports. In this scenario, when fewer ports are occupied, the EVs can still charge at full
speed. ALM can lead to significant savings and ensure that investments in transportation
electrification are used efficiently. Pacific Gas & Electric has worked with EV service providers
to implement ALM solutions at 20 multi-unit dwelling and workplace host sites as of Q4 2020
and saved between $30,000 and $200,000 per project.11 Southern California Edison also worked
with PowerFlex to implement ALM to deploy 168 charging stations at $3,000 per port,
significantly less than comparable deployments at $10,000-$15,000 per port without ALM.12
Moreover, many low-income and other disadvantaged communities are served by
outdated utility infrastructure (substations, transformers) that may require significant and costly
upgrades to be able to accommodate EV charging load. The use of ALM can help mitigate these
infrastructure upgrade costs, therefore making charging infrastructure more affordable for
disadvantaged communities. ALM is a VGI technology that is particularly well-suited for multi-
unit dwellings (MUDs), commercial buildings, workplace charging, and other non-single family
home sites, where low-income customers may be more likely to charge.
ALM would reduce the amount of infrastructure upgrades needed and thus lower the
costs of fleet electrification and of preparing a MUD site for EV charging. As such, VGIC
recommends Eversource ensure that ALM is available to customers as an option and that ALM is
fully incorporated into the proposed Fleet Assessment Services and EV Ready Site Plans. It is
critical that EV advisory services fully inform customers of all cost reduction measures available
to them, including ALM.
V. Managed Charging Offerings Should Center the Customer
The customers must be at the center of any potential managed charging or load
management program. If program incentives are not attractive or visible enough to customers,
participation will be low, and the offerings will fail to deliver grid and ratepayer benefits. To the
11 Pacific Gas & Electric. 2021. Presentation at CPUC ALM/EV EMS Workshop, Panel 2.
12 EPIC Policy + Innovation Coordination Group. 2021. Transportation Electrification Workstream Report.
https://epicpartnership.org/resources/Transportation_Electrification_Workstream_Report_Final.pdf
4

extent that customers are willing and able to participate in any voluntary load management
activities, they will be reducing distribution system costs for all utility customers and therefore
should be rewarded accordingly. VGIC suggests that any future program include appropriate
customer incentives, akin to Massachusetts’ long-standing approach towards funding energy
efficiency and demand-side management activities.
Additionally, the Department should consider allowing customers to simultaneously
participate in multiple managed charging offerings, rather than requiring them to choose between
different options. This would not only maximize customer value but also leverage EV batteries
across EV TOU rates, demand response (i.e., Active Demand Reduction), and other incentive
programs to provide multiple benefits to the grid.
Lastly, the benefits of participation in load management offerings must be effectively
communicated to customers in order to ensure high enrollment rates. National Grid should
consider partnering with OEMs and EV service providers for this communication, since they are
effective messengers regarding EV products and services.
VI. Conclusion
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments and looks forward to
working with Eversource, the Department, and other stakeholders to ensure the success of
Massachusetts’s transportation electrification efforts.
Respectfully submitted,
Zach Woogen
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
5