October 20, 2021
CPUC Energy Division Tariff Unit
505 Van Ness Avenue
San Francisco, California 94102
EDTariffUnit@cpuc.ca.gov
Re: Comments of the Vehicle Grid Integration Council to Resolution E-5165:
Approval, with Modifications, of Vehicle-to-Grid Implementation Plans and
Technical Requirements in Compliance with Decision 20-09-035
Dear Sir or Madam:
Pursuant to General Order 96-B and the Comment Letter accompanying Draft Resolution
E-5165 (“Draft Resolution”), the Vehicle Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) respectfully
comments on the proposed approval of the Joint Advice Letter 3774-E of San Diego Gas and
Electric Company (“SDG&E”), Advice Letter 4510-E of Southern California Edison Company
(“SCE”), and Advice Letter 6209-E of Pacific Gas and Electric Company (“PG&E”) submitted on
May 28, 2021.
The proposed approval of the Joint Advice Letters represents the culmination of diligent
work from stakeholders, including the investor-owned utilities (“IOUs”), that provides a critical
foundation for the future of bidirectional electric vehicle charging operations (“V2G”). In
particular, VGIC appreciates the IOUs’ good faith efforts and flexibility during the V2G workshops
held prior to the Joint Advice Letter filings and pursuant to Decision (“D.”) 20-09-035. In
approving the Joint ALs, the Draft Resolution is a symbol of progress toward widespread V2G
operations and is an encouraging reflection of close collaboration between subject matter experts
at the Commission, IOUs, and industry stakeholders. VGIC is pleased to see V2G DC and V2G
AC implementation steps that are consistent with the needs of customers and broader V2G market
development.
Specifically, the Draft Resolution includes important modifications for both V2G DC
EVSE and V2G AC pathways that were highlighted in VGIC’s June 17, 2021 response to the Joint
ALs. VGIC supports the modifications found in the Draft Resolution, including the clarification
that V2G DC EVSE systems are not required to be certified to the UL PCS CRD if the customer
seeks interconnection from the outset (as opposed to operating first in load-only or “V1G mode,”
an approach that is also detailed in the Draft Resolution). VGIC is also encouraged by the
establishment of lower-cost pathways for V2G AC pilots to interconnect using a trip scheme wired
into the charger rather than installing a second relay. These modifications and the Draft Resolution
as a whole will further unlock the safe and reliable interconnection of V2G systems. With this in

October 20, 2021
Page 2 of 4
mind, VGIC strongly recommends the Commission adopt the Draft Resolution during the
November 4th voting meeting.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit these comments to the Draft Resolution and
looks forward to future collaboration with the Commission and IOUs on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Ed Burgess
Ed Burgess
Senior Policy Director
Vehicle Grid Integration Council
cc: Kristin Landry, Energy Division (Kristin.Landry@cpuc.ca.gov)
Justin Regnier, Energy Division (Justin.Regnier@cpuc.ca.gov)
Service lists R.17-07-007 and R.18-12-006