BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to
Continue the Development of Rates Rulemaking 18-12-006
and Infrastructure for Vehicle (Filed December 13, 2018)
Electrification.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON
THE PROPOSED DECISION SETTING NEAR-TERM PRIORITIES FOR
TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION INVESTMENTS BY THE
ELECTRICAL CORPORATIONS
Edward Burgess
Senior Policy Director
Zach Woogen
Policy Specialist
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400
Berkeley, California 94704
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
June 21, 2021
1

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to
Continue the Development of Rates Rulemaking 18-12-006
and Infrastructure for Vehicle (Filed December 13, 2018)
Electrification.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON
THE PROPOSED DECISION SETTING NEAR-TERM PRIORITIES FOR
TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION INVESTMENTS BY THE
ELECTRICAL CORPORATIONS
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) 1 hereby submits
these comments on the Proposed Decision Setting Near-Term Priorities for Transportation
Electrification Investments by the Electrical Corporations, issued on June 1, 2021.
I. INTRODUCTION.
VGIC is a 501(c)6 membership-based advocacy group committed to advancing the role of
electric vehicles (“EV”) and vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”) through policy development,
education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to a decarbonized transportation
and electric sector by ensuring the value from EV deployments and flexible EV charging and
1 The views expressed in these Comments are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all of the
individual VGIC member companies or supporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/).
2

discharging is recognized and compensated in support of achieving a more reliable, affordable,
and efficient electric grid.
VGIC is generally supportive of the Proposed Decision (“PD”), including the five near-term
priorities and the three forms of near-term requests for transportation electrification (“TE”)
investments. VGIC is especially encouraged by the proposed application process for extensions of
existing programs, as it is critical to minimize the gap in program offerings. With this in mind,
VGIC offers several key recommendations in these comments, summarized below:
 All three forms of near-term requests should be subject to certain provisions of
Decision (“D.”) 20-12-029.
 The Commission should further clarify the process, definitions, and requirements for
extending existing pilots.
 The Commission should take additional steps to promote automated load management
(“ALM”) in the context of near-term priority TE investments.
 The Commission should consider TE programs, pilots, and rates that do not separate
EV load from other behind-the-meter loads and resources.
II. ALL THREE FORMS OF NEAR-TERM REQUESTS SHOULD BE SUBJECT
TO CERTAIN PROVISIONS OF D.20-12-029.
VGIC believes that it is prudent to implement VGI strategies, including those identified in
D.20-12-029, alongside broader TE investment strategies, rather than after TE infrastructure
investments have been made. This proactive approach can support future-proofing of
infrastructure, deployment of VGI technologies, customer awareness of VGI strategies, and right-
sizing of TE infrastructure, which each have the potential to support significant reductions in
ratepayer costs compared to adding VGI after TE investments have already been made. With the
3

unanimous adoption of D.20-12-029, VGIC commended the Commission’s leadership in
promoting and facilitating a more pro-active approach to VGI policy. Ordering Paragraphs (“OP”)
5 of D.20-12-029 directed each IOU to take specific actions related to ALM, “in all of its future
applications for TE programs, or rule or tariff to support TE infrastructure installation.” 2
Additionally, OP 8 of D.20-12-029 directed each IOU to take specific actions related to VGI, “in
all of its future applications for TE programs.” 3 The directives in these OPs are critical to enabling
VGI alongside – rather than after – TE infrastructure investments. Meanwhile, the PD details three
forms of near-term requests for TE programs:
 Advice letter process for near-term priority categories
 Application process for extensions of existing programs
 Other applications outside of the near-term priorities, above advice letter budget cap,
and/or outside of existing program extensions.4
VGIC believes the TE programs proposed in the advice letters should be considered “applications
for TE programs” pursuant to OP 5 and OP 8 of D.20-12-029. Notably, the PD itself refers to the
near-term priority advice letter proposals as “programs.” 5 VGIC recommends the Commission
require near-term priority advice letters be subject to OP 5 and OP 8 of D.20-12-029, which
represent substantive directives with a high likelihood of supporting the goals of SB 676. VGIC
notes the IOUs may have previously erred in regards to their compliance with OP 5 of D.20-12-
029, and we remain concerned this may happen again as IOUs seek approval for TE programs
2 D.20-12-029 at OP 5.
3 D.20-12-029 at OP 8.
4 PD at 25.
5 See, for example, PD at 25 and 35.
4

authorized by the PD. 6 To ensure consistency with previous Commission decisions and to increase
the likelihood of achieving the goals of both SB 676 and SB 350, VGIC recommends the PD be
revised to require that all three forms of near-term requests authorized by the PD, including the
advice letter process, must comply with the relevant provisions of D.20-12-029 (including OP 5
and OP 8 of D.20-12-029).
III. THE COMMISSION SHOULD FURTHER CLARIFY THE PROCESS,
DEFINITIONS, AND REQUIREMENTS FOR EXTENDING EXISTING
PILOTS.
The PD states: “In response to party comment seeking clarity on the status of existing
pilots, the Electrical Corporations may request an extension of existing pilots, per the application
pathway described above.” 7 As a threshold matter, the PD should be revised to clarify whether
“the pathway described above” is pathway 1) Advice Letter Process or 2) Application Process for
Extensions of Existing Programs. Additionally, it is unclear what is considered a “pilot” for the
purposes of requesting an extension. The IOUs are expected to file advice letters by July 15, 2021
requesting approval of up to $35 million to support VGI pilots pursuant to D.20-12-029. VGIC
believes the Commission should establish a pathway for IOUs to request extension or scaling of
VGI pilots in the interim period between the completion of a given VGI pilot and the
implementation of an IOU’s first TE Plan (“TEP”). As such, VGIC recommends the PD be revised
to define “existing pilots” broadly to include both pilots authorized pursuant to SB 350 as well as
VGI pilots authorized pursuant to SB 676.
6 See Response of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council to PG&E Advice Letter 6102-E, SCE Advice Letter 4429-E,
and SDG&E Advice Letter 3705-E.
7 PD at 26.
5

The PD also states: “Any application for an extension to a pilot should demonstrate that 1)
there is outstanding demand to participate in the expiring or soon expiring program, 2) the
extension makes modifications to align with the Vehicle-Grid Integration (VGI) Working Group’s
load management guidance…” 8 VGIC is generally supportive of the Commission’s intent to
require that pilot extension applications promote and enable VGI. VGIC participated alongside
dozens of other key stakeholders in the year-long VGI Working Group, which ultimately produced
a VGI Working Group Final Report detailing its outcomes and recommendations.9 While the VGI
Working Group Final Report contains a classification of key policy recommendations, it does not
include “load management guidance.” As such, VGIC recommends the PD be revised to clarify
what is required for a pilot extension application “to align with the VGI Working Group’s load
management guidance.”
IV. THE COMMISSION SHOULD TAKE ADDITIONAL STEPS TO PROMOTE
ALM IN THE CONTEXT OF NEAR-TERM PRIORITY TE INVESTMENTS.
The PD would require IOUs to address the following in near-term priority advice letters:
“An estimate of the total site-level funding that will be paid by ratepayers and amount paid by
the site host (percentages or dollar amount). To encourage development of EV charging at a
lower cost to ratepayers, programs should be designed to ensure non-ratepayer funding sources
are leveraged.” 10
VGIC notes that utilizing ALM is a promising strategy to develop EV charging infrastructure at a
lower cost, as it can help to stretch each TE program budget by reducing utility-side infrastructure
costs. This application is referred to as “Type 2 ALM.” As noted above in Section II, the IOUs
8 PD at 26.
9 Final Report of the California Joint Agencies Vehicle-Grid Integration Working Group (June 30, 2020)
https://gridworks.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/VGI-Working-Group-Final-Report-6.30.20.pdf.
10 PD at 36.
6

should be required in each advice letter and application authorized by this PD to (a) identify how
it will deploy customer-side ALM where appropriate and (b) describe standard evaluation criteria
to determine host sites where ALM would be beneficial.11 While VGIC recommends ALM be
considered and promoted in each TE program proposal authorized under the PD, the IOUs should
not impose ALM as a required arrangement for all customers. Rather, VGIC recommends ALM
be promoted through a “carrot” rather than a “stick” approach.” Notably, Type 2 ALM may be
particularly well-suite for workplace charging locations, which aligns with the proposed near-term
priority to address customers without access to home charging.
As noted above in Section III, the PD outlines parameters for the extension of existing
pilots, including "the Electrical Corporation clearly incorporates lessons learned from the pilot to
maximize ratepayer benefits and reduce per port costs."12 VGIC emphasizes the importance of this
parameter to facilitate the expedited approval of previously approved TE programs (in addition to
pilots). For example, Pacific Gas and Electric’s (“PG&E”) EV Charge Network (“EVCN”)
program utilized ALM solutions at 20 MUD and workplace host sites as of Q4 2020. PG&E saved
$30,000 to $200,000 per project by implementing ALM with three different EV service providers
at these 20 sites.13 VGIC is encouraged by PG&E’s leadership in leveraging ALM as a tool to save
on utility-site infrastructure costs, effectively stretch authorized TE program budgets, and achieve
a lower cost per port. VGIC believes that Type 2 ALM can reduce cost per port in other TE
programs (as well as non-TE program EV infrastructure). Thus, VGIC is encouraged by the
Commission’s intent to authorize IOUs to extend and scale existing programs and pilots on an
expedited basis, including programs and pilots that incorporate ALM and other VGI strategies.
11 Per OP 5 of D.20-12-029.
12 PD at 26.
13 See PG&E’s Presentation during January 29, 2021 ALM/EV EMS Workshop, Panel 2.
7

VGIC recommends that any additional application parameters and/or advice letter templates
produced by Energy Division staff to support expedited review of existing programs and pilots
should provide IOUs the opportunity to (1) detail the impact of using VGI strategies (including
ALM) and (2) propose expanded use of these VGI strategies.
V. THE COMMISSION SHOULD CONSIDER TE PROGRAMS, PILOTS, AND
RATES THAT DO NOT SEPARATE EV LOAD FROM OTHER BEHIND-
THE-METER LOADS AND RESOURCES.
Separating EV load from other behind-the-meter loads and resources limits customers’
ability to leverage EVs and EV supply equipment (“EVSE”) to support customer bill management,
demand response, and backup power/resiliency. The need for customer-sited backup power
solutions is at an all-time high as California finds itself amid yet another perilous fire season.14
VGIC commends the Commission for establishing resiliency as a targeted near-term priority.
However, existing TE programs have made access to make-ready funding conditional on the
presence of a separate EV meter. This effectively places TE program funding in competition with
the VGI priorities listed above (i.e., customer bill management and demand response) as well as
the resiliency priority’s focus on using EVs to provide backup power. In light of the recent
announcement of the Ford Intelligent Backup Power Solution15, VGIC believes it is timely to
modify TE programs to ensure customers can take advantage of TE funding without having to
forgo the opportunity to use their EVs as backup power supply. Furthermore, supporting customers
that do not wish to take service for their EV under a separate meter would help level the playing
14 Wall Street Journal. PG&E Warns of More Blackouts During California’s Wildfire Season. June 11, 2021.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/pg-e-warns-of-more-blackouts-during-californias-wildfire-season-11623414658
15 Ford Intelligent Backup Power Solution could provide backup power for up to 10 days.
https://www.ford.com/trucks/f150/f150-lightning/2022//?intcmp=hp-bb-f150-lightning
8

field with other distributed energy resources (i.e., stationary energy storage), which receive
dedicated funding support through the Self-Generation Incentive Program. By take steps today to
ensure EVs can interact with other behind-the-meter loads and resources, the Commission can help
to future-proof TE programs as both resiliency priorities and broader VGI implementation
continue to grow in importance. As such, VGIC strongly recommends the Commission explore
how to ensure TE programs include more pathways for customers that do not wish to install EVSE
under a separate meter.
VI. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit these comments on Near-Term Priorities for
TE. We look forward to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this
initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
Edward Burgess
Senior Policy Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
June 21, 2021
9