BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 21-06-017
Modernize the Electric Grid for a High (Filed June 24, 2021)
Distributed Energy Resources Future.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE ORDER
INSTITUTING RULEMAKING TO MODERNIZE THE ELECTRIC GRID FOR A
HIGH DISTRIBUTED ENERGY RESOURCES FUTURE
Edward Burgess
Senior Policy Director
Zach Woogen
Policy Specialist
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400
Berkeley, California 94704
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
August 16, 2021

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 21-06-017
Modernize the Electric Grid for a High (Filed June 24, 2021)
Distributed Energy Resources Future.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE ORDER
INSTITUTING RULEMAKING TO MODERNIZE THE ELECTRIC GRID FOR A
HIGH DISTRIBUTED ENERGY RESOURCES FUTURE
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) hereby submits
these comments on the Order Instituting Rulemaking to Modernize the Electric Grid for a High
Distributed Energy Resources Future (“OIR”), adopted by the Joint Commissioners on June 24,
2021.
I. INTRODUCTION.
VGIC commends the Commission for issuing the OIR and appreciates the attention given
to grid modernization, distribution resource planning, and the integration of distributed energy
resources (“DERs”), including electric vehicles (“EVs”). As VGIC understands, the Distribution
Resources Planning (“DRP”) proceeding (Rulemaking [“R.”] 14-08-013) has supported the
development of new tools like the generation integration capacity analysis (“generation ICA”), as
well as the in-development load integration capacity analysis (“load ICA”). Meanwhile, the DRP
proceeding and the Integrated Distributed Energy Resources (“IDER”) proceeding (R.14-10-003)
have established the distribution investment deferral framework (“DIDF”) to identify distribution
deferral opportunities and lead to solicitations for non-wires solutions. VGIC appreciates the
1

progress that has been made through each of these efforts to promote DER deployment in support
of a more affordable, more reliable, and cleaner grid. VGIC also agrees with the following
statement from the OIR:
“In California, DER growth will continue to increase, especially due to policies and
programs driving transportation electrification (TE) and associated DERs (i.e., EVs and
EV supply equipment [EVSE]).”1
VGIC generally supports the Commission’s renewed focus on DERs and the holistic approach to
distribution system planning, grid modernization, grid architecture, and DER integration outlined
in the OIR. Specifically, VGIC agrees with the inclusion of TE issues within the OIR, and offers
these comments and recommendations related to TE within the preliminary scope and schedule of
this proceeding.
II. BACKGROUND & INTEREST IN PROCEEDING.
VGIC is a 501(c)6 membership-based advocacy group committed to advancing the role of
EVs and VGI through policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the
transition to a decarbonized transportation and electric sector by ensuring the value from EV
deployments and flexible EV charging and discharging is recognized and compensated in support
of achieving a more reliable, affordable, and efficient electric grid. VGIC currently has 12
members, including automotive original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”) and EV service
providers (“EVSPs”), and has a direct interest in shaping the policies, procedures, and rules needed
to modernize the electric grid for a high DER future. VGIC has been an active participant in related
rulemaking such as the Transportation Electrification or “DRIVE” (R.18-12-006), Self-Generation
1 OIR at 8.
2

Incentive Program (R.20-05-012), Microgrids and Resiliency (R.19-09-009), Streamlining
Interconnection of DERs (R.17-07-007), and Emergency Summer Reliability (R.20-11-003).
III. COMMENTS ON THE PROPOSED SCOPE.
In recognition of the anticipated growth of DERs, including VGI-capable EVs, VGIC
appreciates the magnitude of the challenge facing California’s electric grid. The ongoing transition
from one-way control of hundreds of generation resources to coordination of thousands and,
eventually, millions of DERs is a significant paradigm shift for grid operators, utilities, and the
Commission alike. However, VGIC believes the Commission is taking the correct steps to tackle
important policy questions in three distinct tracks. Below VGIC addresses scoping items within
the proposed tracks.
A. The ambitious nature of this proceeding should not detract from opportunities to
implement near-term reforms for EVs that can benefit a high DER future under
existing policies and programs, including demand response.
VGIC is generally supportive of the ambitious nature of this proceeding and believes
the three-track approach proposed in the OIR is an appropriate framework for tackling each
scoping issue. However, VGIC is concerned that the ambitious and inclusive nature of the
scope may delay or detract from opportunities to advance a high-DER future in other
proceedings. Significant near-term policy reforms related to integrating DERs, including EVs,
should remain a key focus area for the Commission and stakeholders.
As highlighted by Governor Newsom’s July 30th emergency proclamation, California
faces pressing reliability concerns due to extreme heat, drought, and wildfire risk. To mitigate
these reliability concerns without compromising its climate goals, California needs an all-of-
the-above approach that includes near-term reforms to unlock the latent load reduction and
3

export capacity in already deployed EVs. VGIC believes California must make significant
progress in its ability to leverage EVs as a grid resource and encourages the Commission to
take bold and decisive action in the near term to do so. For example, the May 10, 2021 VGI
DR Workshop Report highlights several near-term reforms to existing utility demand response
program to increase participation of EVs.2 VGIC strongly recommends that the ambitious
nature of the High-DER OIR scope not detract from opportunities to implement near-term
reforms to demand response programs, in addition to other policy forums with the potential to
unlock EVs as a grid resource.
B. The Scope should more clearly establish how this effort will be coordinated with the
recent UNIDE framework proposal.
On May 25, 2021, Energy Division staff held an Advanced DER and Flexible Load
Management Workshop to present their high-level concept for a unified, universal, dynamic,
economic signal or “UNIDE” framework to consolidate existing rates, supply-side DR, and
distribution level DR. The staff presented a six-step roadmap to (1) standardized, universal
access to electricity prices, (2) introduce dynamic price per CAISO wholesale energy cost, (3)
modify prices per real-time, localized grid conditions, (4) transition to bi-directional prices, (5)
offer subscription option (average load shape & energy quantity), and (6) introduce transactive
features (ability to lock in price in advance). Staff expressed their intent to recommend the
Commission open a rulemaking to consider proposal in stages. VGIC believes the proposed
UNIDE framework, much like the proposed high-DER OIR scope, is ambitious in nature.
VGIC appreciates the CPUC’s attention to structural reform, however, is concerned over the
2 EVs and DR: VGI-DR Workshop Report. May 10, 2021.
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5dcde7af8ed96b403d8aeb70/t/60a452d8c996a914d3c60f1d/162138
1853358/VGI+DR+Workshop+Report.pdf
4

ability for stakeholders to engage in multiple comprehensive DER proceedings at once, in
addition to ongoing proceedings focused on near-term action items. As written, it is unclear
how the proposed high-DER OIR scope will interact with a potential UNIDE framework
proceeding. VGIC respectfully requests the CPUC revise the proposed scope of the high-DER
OIR to more clearly establish how this effort will be coordinated with the recent UNIDE
framework proposal.
C. VGIC supports the consideration of performance-based regulation as a tool to better
understand and implement a high DER future.
VGIC is encouraged by Track 1’s focus on the potential for a DSO model to
accommodate a high-DER future grid and unlock the potential of third-party aggregators to
reduce costs. VGIC’s experiences in proposing strategies to advance VGI has revealed that the
existing set of incentives offered to investor-owned utilities (“IOUs”) may not always be
aligned with a high-DER future grid. In response to this barrier, California examined PBR
concepts in the 2016 DER incentive pilot proposals.3 Meanwhile, the OIR notes that the Hawaii
Public Utilities Commission (“HPUC”) recently adopted a performance-based ratemaking
(“PBR”) framework that is designed to incentivize the utility to prepare for DER deployment.4
VGIC believes that certain PBR concepts that incentivize streamlined adoption and
integration of DERs, including EVs, can complement a DSO model. VGIC recognizes that the
development of a broader PBR framework would likely be a long and lengthy undertaking,
3 See, for example, Assigned Commissioner’s Ruling Introducing A Draft Regulatory Incentives Proposal
for Discussion and Comment. April 4, 2016. R.14-10-003.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M159/K702/159702148.PDF and What If Utilities Got
a Better Rate of Return for Distributed Energy Resources? Jeff St. John. April 8, 2016.
https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/california-to-test-incentive-for-utilities-that-pick-
distributed-energy-ove
4 OIR at 17.
5

however, we recommend the Commission consider a limited number of PBR features that may
specifically apply to a high DER future. Additionally, the Commission should draw lessons
from the 2016 DER incentive pilot proposal experience to better understand both the
opportunities and potential challenges with enacting PBR reforms.5
To ensure the PBR themes are sufficiently captured in this OIR, VGIC recommends
question 4 in Track 1 be revised as follows:
4. Should the IOUs be incentivized to cost-effectively prepare for widespread DER
deployments? How can performance-based regulation (PBR) and performance-based
incentives be used as a tool to prepare for DER deployment? What other modifications to
the existing utility incentive structure should be considered to prepare for DER
deployment? If so, how?39
D. VGIC supports question 2 in Track 3 to consider how Grid Modernization Plans
should be coordinated with IOU TE plan filings, and recommends it also consider
coordination with non-TE-plan EV infrastructure.
In reviewing the OIR, VGIC is concerned with the alignment of preliminary scoping
questions with key ongoing and upcoming TE issues. VGIC supports the intent of question 2
in Track 3: “Should TE needs be updated in the IOU Grid Modernization Plans? If so, how,
and in what ways should the Grid Modernization Plans be coordinated with IOU TE plan
filings?” 6 VGIC strongly recommends this coordination extend in recognition of a recent
notable recent development in the DRIVE proceeding. As VGIC understands, key elements of
AB 841 implementation are likely to advance through Draft Resolution E-5167, which would
5 See, for example, Assigned Commissioner’s Ruling Introducing A Draft Regulatory Incentives Proposal
for Discussion and Comment. April 4, 2016. R.14-10-003.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M159/K702/159702148.PDF and What If Utilities Got
a Better Rate of Return for Distributed Energy Resources? Jeff St. John. April 8, 2016.
https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/california-to-test-incentive-for-utilities-that-pick-
distributed-energy-ove
6 OIR at 23.
6

approve the IOUs’ requests to establish new EV Infrastructure Rules.7 This policy issue
highlights the need to consider the OIR’s interaction with non-TE-program EV infrastructure
as well as the IOUs TE plan filings. As such, VGIC recommends that Track 3, question 2 be
modified as follows to consider non-TE-program EV infrastructure in addition to IOU TE plan
filings:
2. Should TE needs be updated in the IOU Grid Modernization Plans? If so, how, and in
what ways should the Grid Modernization Plans be coordinated with IOU TE plan filings
and the IOUs’ proposed EV Infrastructure Rules pursuant to AB 841?57
IV. CATEGORIZATION, HEARINGS, AND SCHEDULE.
VGIC supports the categorization and proposed schedule of this proceeding, and agrees
with the preliminary determination to find no need for evidentiary hearings.
V. NOTICES.
Services of all notices and communications in this proceeding should be directed to the
following VGIC representative:
Ed Burgess
Senior Policy Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400
Berkeley, California, 94704
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
7 Resolution E-5167 Pacific Gas & Electric, Southern California Edison, and San Diego Gas & Electric
request approval to establish new Electric Vehicle (EV) Infrastructure Rules and associated Memorandum
Accounts, pursuant to Assembly Bill 841. Draft Resolution issued August 4, 2021.
7

VI. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit these comments on the OIR. We look forward
to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Edward Burgess
Edward Burgess
Senior Policy Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: August 16, 2021
8