Comments of VGIC on the Draft Three-Year Energy Efficiency Plan
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)1 is a 501(c)(6) membership-based advocacy group
committed to advancing the tole of electric vehicles (EVs) and vehicle-grid integration (VGI) through
policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to a decarbonized
transportation and electric sector by ensuring the value from EV deployments and flexible EV charging
and discharging is recognized and compensated in support of achieving a more reliable, affordable, and
efficient electric grid. VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide comments to the Energy Efficiency
Advisory Council (EEAC) on the Draft Three-Year Energy Efficiency Plan for 2022-2024, particularly
regarding the Active Demand Reduction (ADR) offering for EVs.
EVs are capable of load reduction through managed charging, battery discharge to serve on-site
load, and serving as a temporary generation resource through exports of power to the grid. As such, EVs
represent a tremendous amount of latent battery storage capacity that can be utilized to support grid
needs. Overall, VGIC is encouraged by the Program Administrators’ consideration of EVs for the ADR
program, including the incorporation of both EVSE- and telematics-based approaches. However, the
Draft Plan did not provide any details on the potential program offering other than the fact that National
Grid and Eversource are evaluating their current EV ADR offerings to develop a statewide offering by the
summer of 2022. VGIC urges the Council and Program Administrators to include in the Draft Plan more
details on the program development process and structure. At minimum, there should be information
on incentive structure, customer eligibility, as well as any avenues for stakeholders to provide input on
the detailed program construct.
VGIC recommends the following high-level best practices, gleaned from VGIC’s experience
working on EV demand response programs in California, be considered in the development of the ADR
offering for EVs:
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., dcbel, Enel X North America,
Inc., Fermata, LLC., Ford Motor Company, General Motors Company, Nissan North America, Inc., Nuvve
Corporation, Stellantis N.V., The Mobility House, Toyota Motor North America, Inc., and Veloce Energy, Inc. The
views expressed in these comments are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all individual
VGIC member companies or supporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/).

 Allow for several program participation options: 1) direct participation and 2) participation
via an aggregator.
o It should not be assumed that any potential program structure would be too
complex for customers. Customers and vendors/aggregators should be offered a
menu of options with varying levels of commitment and compensation based on the
services they provide to the grid. Customers and vendors can select what works best
for them based on the range of options provided.
o Stakeholder input should inform how to remove barriers to entry for third-party
vendors/aggregators.
 Residential customers only represent a portion of EV customers. Expanding offerings to EV
fleet customers would allow a larger number of EVs to provide grid services under the ADR
program. Fleet customers may also be more sophisticated and more capable of consistently
responding to dispatch signals.
 EVs will respond to the best available price signal. Therefore, barriers to value stacking with
other programs (such as Clean Peak Standard and Connected Solutions) should be
considered and removed where possible.
 In addition to reducing charging load via managed charging (V1G), EVs can also export
power to the grid (V2G). V2G provides even greater grid benefits than V1G and should be
compensated for the additional benefits.
o If there are concerns about the performance of bidirectional EV supply equipment
(EVSE), performance-based incentives for vehicle-to-grid (V2G) exports should be
considered to validate to what extent V2G can deliver the same benefits as
stationary storage.
 Broad eligibility should be considered, including for co-location and co-optimization with
other behind-the-meter resources and loads.
 Existing program design should be leveraged where possible to facilitate scaling and
integration into other programs.

VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments and look forward to working with
the Council, Program Administrators, and other stakeholders to ensure the success of the EV ADR
program.
Respectfully submitted,
Ed Burgess
Policy Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)