BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to
Establish Policies, Processes, and Rulemaking 20-11-003
Rules to Ensure Reliable Electric (Filed November 19, 2020)
Service in California in the Event of an
Extreme Weather Event in 2021.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON E-MAIL
RULING SEEKING RESPONSES REGARDING A PROPOSED AMENDED SCOPE
AND SCHEDULE TO ADDRESS RELIABILITY ISSUES IN 2022 AND 2023
Edward Burgess
Senior Policy Director
Zach Woogen
Policy Specialist
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400
Berkeley, California 94704
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
August 6, 2021

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to
Establish Policies, Processes, and Rulemaking 20-11-003
Rules to Ensure Reliable Electric (Filed November 19, 2020)
Service in California in the Event of an
Extreme Weather Event in 2021.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON E-MAIL
RULING SEEKING RESPONSES REGARDING A PROPOSED AMENDED SCOPE
AND SCHEDULE TO ADDRESS RELIABILITY ISSUES IN 2022 AND 2023
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) hereby submits
these comments on the E-mail Ruling Seeking Responses Regarding a Proposed Amended Scope
and Schedule to Address Reliability Issues in 2022 and 2023 (“Ruling”), issued by Administrative
Law Judge (“ALJ”) Brian R. Stevens on August 2, 2021.
I. INTRODUCTION.
VGIC is a 501(c)6 membership-based advocacy group committed to advancing the role of
electric vehicles (“EV”) and vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”) through policy development,
education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to a decarbonized transportation
and electric sector by ensuring the value from EV deployments and flexible EV charging and
discharging is recognized and compensated in support of achieving a more reliable, affordable,
and efficient electric grid.
VGIC commends the ALJ for issuing the Ruling to address California’s pressing reliability
concerns, as detailed in Governor Newsom’s July 30th emergency proclamation. As VGIC
1

understands, California’s available options to ensure reliability for 2022 and 2023 on short notice
are substantially limited. Relying on hydro capacity is risky as extreme heat and drought continue
to plague the west. On the other hand, reliance on fossil fuel generation jeopardizes California’s
climate goals and would likely further exacerbate the power sector’s contribution to global
emissions and, ultimately, the very extreme weather events that are contributing to the current
reliability concerns.
Meanwhile, efforts to deploy additional, utility-scale renewable energy and energy storage
are underway, and the Governor’s emergency proclamation directs and requests bold action from
state agencies, including the Commission, to streamlining permitting and construction for these
resources.1 However, to mitigate reliability concerns without compromising its climate goals,
California needs an all-of-the-above approach that includes both utility-scale renewables and
energy storage, but also distributed energy resources (“DERs”). VGIC believes California must
make significant progress in its ability to leverage DERs and encourages the Commission to take
bold and decisive action to unlock latent capacity in already deployed resources, including EVs.
VGIC offers the following comments focusing on how to refine the scope to unlock EVs as a grid
resource for Summer 2022 and 2023.
II. COMMENTS ON THE PROPOSED SCOPE.
A. VGIC supports the inclusion of EV load management or “V1G” in the Ruling’s
proposed scope.
Each of California’s three major investor-owned utilities (“IOUs”) offer whole-home time-
of-use (“TOU”) rates, and PG&E and SDG&E offer a separately metered residential EV TOU rate.
1 Kavya Balaraman. California governor moves to free up electricity supply amid projected 3.5 GW summer shortfall.
Utility Dive. August 3, 2021. https://www.utilitydive.com/news/california-governor-moves-to-free-up-electricity-
supply-amid-projected-35/604344/
2

The IOUs also offer separately metered EV TOU rates for commercial customers and multi-unity
dwellings (“MUDs”), with SCE waiving demand charges and PG&E and SDG&E offering
subscription rate structures. While these TOU rates have been effective in shaping EV load, VGIC
believes much more should be done to unlock additional load reduction from EVs through EV load
management or “V1G.” Decision (“D.”) 20-12-029 (the “VGI Decision”) adopted EV load
management as a strategy to achieve the goals of SB 676, and PG&E and SCE recently filed advice
letters seeking approval of VGI pilots.2 While VGIC is encouraged by several of the proposed VGI
pilots, the Governor’s proclamation highlights an urgent and important need to promote VGI
strategies far beyond the limited VGI pilots that have been proposed. With this in mind, VGIC
recommends the EV load management scope item include approaches to unlock third-party
submetering pathways to alleviate the critical barriers detailed below.
Existing IOU transportation electrification (“TE”) programs typically require EV load be
separated from customers’ building load to be eligible for program incentives. Additionally,
separately metered EV TOU rates typically have higher peak/off-peak differentials than their
whole-home TOU counterparts, which may make them a more compelling choice for some
customers. The combination of funding from TE programs and compelling value proposition of
separately metered TOU rates creates an environment in which customers are nudged toward
isolating EV load from site load. However, isolating EV load significantly limits the ability for
EVs to achieve load reductions by using VGI technologies. First, standalone EV load is a unique
end-use load that may benefit from additional consideration and methodology development to
construct baselines within existing demand response (“DR”) programs. Second, isolated
2 Advice Letter 6259-E Requesting for Approval of PG&E’s VGI Pilots in Compliance with Decision 20-
12-029 and Advice Letter 4542-E Request for Approval of Proposed Vehicle Grid Integration Pilots,
submitted on July 15, 2021.
3

bidirectional EVs and EV supply equipment (“EVSE”) cannot provide backup power, mitigate
demand charges, or otherwise offset grid consumption by discharging. In addition, some customers
may not want to expose their whole site load to a TOU rate or are unable to install level two (“L2”)
charging stations. For these customers, vehicle telematics in particular offers a low-cost pathway
to enable VGI.
Unlocking the use of EVSE submeters and vehicle telematics to establish baselines and
support settlement is a critical next step to alleviate these barriers by providing a low-cost way to
separately measure comingled EV and site load. VGIC believes resolving this set of issues is
required to enable additional EV load reductions in support of system reliability and recommends
it be included in the amended scope ruling.
B. Vehicle-to-grid exports should be added to the scope as a pathway to increase peak
and net peak resources in 2022 and 2023.
VGIC appreciates the Commission’s attention and consideration of bi-directional EV and
EV supply equipment (“EVSE”) systems in the development of the Emergency Load Reduction
Program (“ELRP”). For the past several years, the Commission and industry stakeholders have
struggled with a “chicken or egg” problem when it comes to considering the ability of vehicle-to-
grid (“V2G”) exports to support the grid. Due to the limited number of available products, it was
challenging to generate stakeholder momentum to develop a pathway to incentivize V2G exports.
Meanwhile the lack of any incentive structure to sustain V2G activities hampered the commercial
activity and product development of these solutions, despite the technology being well understood
and used in other markets.
4

Today, VGIC believes the V2G industry has reached an important tipping point as evident
by the variety and magnitude of commercially available solutions, many of which are already on
California’s roads. There are an estimated 27,000 V2G-capable Nissan LEAFs in California today,
equal to approximately 876 MWh of energy storage capacity.3 In addition, Blue Bird has delivered
over 100 V2G-capable electric school buses providing a potential 15 MWh of energy storage4,
with Proterra and Lion also offering V2G-capable medium- and heavy-duty vehicles (“MHDV”).
There are also V2G-capable Mitsubishi EVs in California, the i-MiEV and Outlander PHEV,
which contribute an additional 2,121 vehicles and potential 27 MWh of energy storage capacity
on the road in California.5 The recently announced Ford F-150 Lightning, scheduled to be on
California’s roads in 2022, can provide full-home power for up to three days, or up to 10 days if
power is rationed.6 VGIC notes that today’s bidirectional vehicles span the light-duty vehicle
(“LDV”) and MHDV sectors, as do bidirectional EVSE offerings from providers like dcbel,
Fermata Energy, and Nuvve Corporation.
Meanwhile, D.20-09-035 (the “September 2020 Rule 21 Decision”) confirmed V2G Direct
Current (“V2G DC”) EVSE can seek interconnection under Rule 21, and V2G systems have
3 As of the end of 2020, an estimated 27,000 V2G-capable Nissan LEAFs are on the road in California,
totaling an estimated 876 MWh of energy storage capacity, assuming only vehicles model year (“MY”)
2013 or later are V2G-capable, MY2013-2015 vehicles have a 24 kWh battery, 2016 30 kWh, and 2017-
2019 40 kWh. Assuming 7 kWh per home, VGIC estimates this is equivalent to 125,000 homes.
California Energy Commission (2021). California Energy Commission Zero Emission Vehicle and
Infrastructure Statistics. Data last updated April 30, 2021. https://www.energy.ca.gov/zevstats
4 According to Blue Bird Corporation, they have delivered more than 400 electric school buses, with more
than 100 V2G-capable buses to California, each with a 155kWh battery pack.
5 Mitsubishi i-MiEV has a 16 kWh battery and Outlander PHEV has a 12 kWh battery pack. There are
1,750 Outlander PHEV and 371 i-MiEV in California.
California Energy Commission (2021). California Energy Commission Zero Emission Vehicle and
Infrastructure Statistics. Data last updated August 28, 2020. https://www.energy.ca.gov/zevstats
6 Ford. 2021. The Truck of the Future is Here: All-Electric Ford F-150 Lightning.
https://media.ford.com/content/fordmedia/fna/us/en/news/2021/05/19/all-electric-ford-f-150-
lightning.html
5

already sought Rule 21 interconnection.7 In addition, the ELRP’s inclusion of Rule 21 exporting
DERs, which includes V2G DC EVSE, places V2G systems on a level playing field with stationary
energy storage systems within the context of a specific compensation pathway for behind-the-
meter (“BTM”) exports.
To VGIC’s knowledge, the establishment of the ELRP is the first such action taken in
California – and perhaps the nation – to compensate V2G exports alongside stationary energy
storage exports. Although VGIC generally supports the proposed ELRP pilot, it has not been
welcomed by industry actors given its limited ability to support a sustaining business model. VGIC
believes that V2G resources, once incentivized to do so, will play an important role in increasing
peak resources in 2022 and 2023. As such, VGIC strongly recommends that V2G exports be
considered in scope as an opportunity to increase supply.
C. The scope should consider how to leverage other programs in addition to ELRP
and existing demand response programs.
As explained above in Section II.B, VGIC believes the energy-only structure of the ELRP
may be an insufficient mechanism to drive significant load reduction and exports from the over
600,000 flexible EVs in California, an estimated 29,000 of which are already V2G-capable.8 VGIC
urges the Commission to continue iterating on the ELRP pilot structure ahead of Summer 2022
and Summer 2023, especially as EV adoption and EVSE deployment are expected to continue
growing at a rapid pace. VGIC therefore supports the inclusion of ELRP in the proposed amended
scoping ruling.
7 See, for example, PG&E Quarterly Interconnection Timeline Report Q2 2021.
8 As of the end of 2020, an estimated 27,000 V2G-capable Nissan LEAFs, 1,750 Mitsubishi Outlander
PHEVs, and Mitsubishi 371 i-MiEV are on the road in California.
California Energy Commission (2021). California Energy Commission Zero Emission Vehicle and
Infrastructure Statistics. Data last updated August 28, 2020. https://www.energy.ca.gov/zevstats
6

Similarly, the IOUs should explore ways to integrate and compensate V2G exports into
programs that already provide capacity payments. As such, VGIC supports the inclusion of
modifications to existing demand response programs in the proposed amended scoping ruling, and
specifically recommends modifications to capacity bidding programs to integrate and compensate
V2G exports be considered as an opportunity to achieve incremental reductions in net load.
VGIC believes that consideration of strategies to reduce demand in 2022 and 2023 should
not be limited to ELRP, existing DR programs, and a new real-time capacity bidding program.
VGIC recommends the following items also be considered in the scope of this proceeding:
 Pathways to clarify and accelerate where reasonable the scale-up of the recently
proposed VGI pilots to become full-scale programs
 Creation and expansion of technology incentives, such as SGIP, to include V2G
technologies
 Pathways for BTM resources, including EVs, to support reliability through
California’s resource adequacy (“RA”) framework.
 Streamlining of Rule 21 processes for small DERs, including V2G DC EVSE.
VGIC reiterates that in order to mitigate reliability concerns without compromising its
climate goals, California must use an all-of-the-above approach to leverage all available resources
at its disposal. VGIC urges the Commission take bold and decisive action to leverage both V1G
and V2G resources to support Summer 2022 and 2023 reliability.
D. VGIC believes the emergency proclamation’s intent to streamline permitting and
construction for resources extends to behind-the-meter resources, including VGI-
capable TE infrastructure.
To better leverage VGI strategies to reduce peak demand and increase peak resources, the
Commission should consider strategies to accelerate the deployment of VGI-capable TE
infrastructure. Notably, the Governor’s emergency proclamation emphasizes the importance of
7

streamlining the permitting and construction of energy resources, and VGIC believes this directive
extends to BTM resources, including VGI-capable TE infrastructure. Automated Load
Management (“ALM”), which can streamline deployment of VGI resources, was a central part of
the December VGI Decision. However, there is growing recognition among VGI stakeholders,
including VGIC, that more needs to be done to facilitate the full range of ALM capabilities.9 To
date, very little has been modified or advanced to integrate ALM into TE programs or EV
infrastructure deployed outside of TE programs, despite the clear provisions and intent of the VGI
Decision. VGIC believes “Type 2” ALM in particular can support streamlined deployment of VGI
resources by adding EVSE on an existing service without triggering utility-side distribution system
upgrades.10 This can be achieved by using customer-side ALM technologies (both software and
hardware solutions) to reduce peak load of an multi-EVSE site, and in this way ALM would not
only support the infrastructure deferral or avoidance, but also reduce net system peak per the goals
of this proceeding. As such, VGIC recommends these concepts of streamlined permitting and
construction of EVSE, including through Type 2 ALM, be explored within the scope of this
proceeding.
9 See, for example, Enabling Automated Load Management (ALM) – VGI Stakeholder Letter to CPUC.
Advanced Energy Economy, AMPLY Power, Inc., California Energy Storage Alliance, Enel X North
America, Inc., Greenlots, Mobility House, Nuvve, Powerflex, Siemens, Vehicle-Grid Integration Council,
and Veloce Energy. June 16, 2021.
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5dcde7af8ed96b403d8aeb70/t/60d2dbd25b043e4141b16164/16244
31572513/Enabling+ALM+-+Stakeholder+Letter+to+CPUC.pdf
10 For clarification, “Type 1” ALM refers to the use of load management for participation in demand
response or TOU rates, while “Type 2” ALM refers to load management used to avoid additional
distribution system upgrades. Type 2 ALM is accomplished by using ALM solutions to safely connect
multiple charging ports whose total nameplate load would otherwise exceed the rated capacity of the
customer connection. This in turn can avoid the need to upgrade an existing customer site with a new service
connection, customer-side panel upgrade, or utility-side distribution system upgrade. While the IOUs have
implemented some Type 1 ALM applications, they have not all fully embraced Type 2 ALM.
8

III. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to these comments on the Ruling. We look forward to
further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Edward Burgess
Edward Burgess
Senior Policy Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: August 6, 2021
9