March 18, 2021
CPUC Energy Division Tariff Unit
505 Van Ness Avenue
San Francisco, California 94102
EDTariffUnit@cpuc.ca.gov
Re: Response of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council to Advice Letter 4429-E of
Southern California Edison
Dear Sir or Madam:
Pursuant to the provisions of General Order 96-B, the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
(“VGIC”) hereby submits this response to the above-referenced Advice Letter 4429-E of Southern
California Edison Company (“SCE”), Southern California Edison Company’s Proposed
Establishment of Rule 29, Electric Vehicle Infrastructure, and Preliminary Statement Part N.50,
Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Memorandum Account, to Implement Assembly Bill 841 (“Advice
Letter”), submitted on February 26, 2021.
I. INTRODUCTION.
VGIC is a 501(c)6 membership-based advocacy group committed to advancing the role of
electric vehicles (“EV”) and vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”) through policy development,
education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to a decarbonized transportation
and electric sector by ensuring the value from EV deployments and flexible EV charging and
discharging is recognized and compensated in support of achieving a more reliable, affordable, and
efficient electric grid.
II. DISCUSSION.
In reviewing the Advice Letter, VGIC supports the proposed Rule 29 and recommends it be
adopted without delay to fulfill the intent of Assembly Bill (“AB”) 841. While not objecting to the
proposed Rule 29, VGIC notes the proposed Rule may not be fully compliant with Ordering
Paragraph (“OP”) 5 of Decision (“D.”) 20-12-029, which states:
“Southern California Edison Company, San Diego Gas & Electric Company, and Pacific Gas
and Electric Company shall, each, in all of its future applications for transportation
electrification (TE) programs, or rule or tariff to support TE infrastructure installation:

March 18, 2021
Page 2 of 3
identify how it will deploy customer-side Automated Load Management (ALM) at
host sites through such programs, rule, and/or tariff where appropriate because this
technology will support TE installation at equal or lesser costs than hardware-based
electrical capacity while meeting TE charging needs; and
describe its standard evaluation criteria to determine host sites where ALM would
benefit ratepayers by reducing costs while meeting host site needs for electric vehicle
charging.” 1
VGIC does not interpret the proposed Rule 29 as including either (a) an identification of
how it will deploy customer-side ALM where appropriate or (b) a description of a standard
evaluation criteria to determine host sites where ALM would be beneficial. To the extent that the
proposed Rule 29 constitutes a “…rule or tariff to support TE infrastructure installation,”2 VGIC
identifies this potential inconsistency and recommends it be addressed in a future forum.
To be clear, VGIC believes the proposed Rule 29 will meaningfully accelerate transportation
electrification by significantly reducing the potential costs incurred by customers installing new EV
supply equipment (“EVSE”). As such, VGIC recommends the proposed Rule 29 be approved
without delay, but reiterates the proposed Rule 29 should be updated in the future to incorporate
opportunities to encourage or incentivize ALM solutions that can potentially reduce distribution
system upgrade costs. The development of strategies to promote ALM solutions and standard
evaluation criteria to determine host sites where ALM would be beneficial should be discussed
further with a broad set of stakeholders to work through key remaining issues before
implementation. These strategies could then be included in a revised version of the proposed Rule
29 as an option for customers who choose to pursue ALM (but should not be a requirement).
III. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit this response to SCE’s Advice Letter. We look
forward to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Edward Burgess
Edward Burgess
Senior Policy Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
cc: Gary A. Stern, SCE (AdviceTariffManager@sce.com)
1 D.20-12-029 OP 5.
2 Ibid.

March 18, 2021
Page 3 of 3
Tara S. Kaushik c/o Karyn Gansecki (Karyn.Gansecki@sce.com)
Service list R.18-12-006