August 25, 2021
CPUC Energy Division Tariff Unit
505 Van Ness Avenue
San Francisco, CA 94102
EDTariffUnit@cpuc.ca.gov
RE: Draft Resolution E-5167. Approves, with modifications, the requests from Pacific Gas
& Electric Company (“PG&E”), Southern California Edison Company (“SCE”), and
San Diego Gas & Electric Company (“SDG&E”) to establish new Electric Vehicle
(“EV”) Infrastructure Rules and associated Memorandum Accounts, pursuant to
Assembly Bill (“AB”) 841 (Ting, 2020).
Dear Sir or Madam,
Pursuant to Rule 14.5 of the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public
Utilities Commission (“Commission”) and the Comment Letter accompanying Draft Resolution
E-5167 (“Draft Resolution”), the Vehicle Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) respectfully
comments on the proposed approval of the new EV Infrastructure Rules.
I. OVERVIEW
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on the proposed approval of the
new EV Infrastructure Rules. While the Draft Resolution is encouraging, and VGIC is generally
supportive of its adoption, we believe it can and should be modified to strengthen the proposed
approach to load management. As written, the Draft Resolution provides no meaningful
assurance that load management solutions will be maximized to ensure EV infrastructure is
deployed cost effectively and minimizes the burden on ratepayers. VGIC is concerned that the
Draft Resolution does not adequately support meaningful, voluntary load management solutions
that could benefit both EV and non-EV customers alike. With this in mind, VGIC strongly urges
that the Commission modify the Draft Resolution to direct clear and detailed next steps to
advance VGI strategies, including Automated Load Management (“ALM”), within the EV
Infrastructure Rules that align with the intent and directions of D.20-12-029. VGIC’s comments
are summarized below:
● Unless the Commission establishes a new method for incentivizing customers to
pursue ALM solutions (if the customer is willing and able based on their charging
needs), it will essentially be abandoning one of its best tools for managing EV
infrastructure costs and minimizing ratepayer burden.
● There is broad alignment on this issue, and VGIC addresses other parties’ positions
on VGIC’s proposed ALM approach.
1

August 25, 2021
● VGIC strongly recommends the Commission establish a robust follow-up process to
this resolution for developing and implementing ALM solutions as a means to
manage EV infrastructure costs going forward
● VGIC recommends the Commission modify the draft resolution to acknowledge and
define Automated Load Management
● It is critical that the EV infrastructure rules do not arbitrarily push customers toward
requiring a separate service or meter, as separating EV from site load obstructs
implementation of VGI strategies per D.20-12-029
● VGIC proposes specific language changes to the Draft Resolution provided in an
Appendix to these comments.
II. BACKGROUND
On January 15, 2021, the Commission issued an Assigned Commissioner’s Ruling
(“ACR”) regarding the implementation of AB 841. On that same day, VGIC served joint
comments on ALM workshop questions with Environmental Defense Fund, Enel X, Nuvve,
Siemens, Greenlots, Advanced Energy Economy, and Natural Resources Defense Council.1 On
January 29, 2021 the Commission hosted the Automated Load Management solutions workshop
that the IOUs participated in, as directed by D.20-12-029, which included presentations and
proposals from several stakeholders including VGIC. On February 5, 2021 and February 19,
2021, VGIC and other parties submitted opening and reply comments addressing fundamental
issues related to the implementation of AB 841. Subsequently, on February 26, 2021, PG&E,
SCE, and SDG&E (collectively, the “IOUs”), filed Advice Letters 6102-E, 4429-E, and 3705-E
requesting approval of proposed EV Infrastructure Rules and AB 841 Memorandum Accounts.
On March 18, 2021, VGIC filed a response to each Advice Letter that highlighted the lack of
compliance with Ordering Paragraph (“OP”) 5 of Decision (“D.”) 20-12-029. On June 16, VGIC
sent a letter on behalf of a broad coalition of VGI stakeholders to the Commission and Energy
Division staff recommending key next steps to enable ALM.2
Under the proposed new EV Infrastructure rules (which do not consider ALM in
accordance with OP 5 D.20-12-029), California ratepayers are poised to start spending hundreds
of millions of dollars on new EV infrastructure, without sufficient time for the Commission to
consider options for managing these costs. We believe ALM is a critical solution in this regard
and could be broadly integrated into future EV infrastructure deployment. However, this must be
1 Joint Comments on ALM Workshop Questions
2 VGI stakeholder letter re Enabling ALM to the CPUC, signed by Advanced Energy Economy, AMPLY Power,
Inc., California Energy Storage Alliance, Enel X North America, Inc., Greenlots, Mobility House, Nuvve,
Powerflex, Siemens, VGIC, and Veloce Energy. June 16, 2021.
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5dcde7af8ed96b403d8aeb70/t/60d2dbd25b043e4141b16164/1624431572513/
Enabling+ALM+-+Stakeholder+Letter+to+CPUC.pdf
2

August 25, 2021
done thoughtfully so that it does not present an added burden to potential EV customers, and
instead maximizes benefit to both EV and non-EV customers alike.
III. UNLESS THE COMMISSION ESTABLISHES A NEW METHOD FOR
INCENTIVIZING CUSTOMERS TO PURSUE ALM SOLUTIONS (WHERE AND
WHEN IT MAKES SENSE), IT WILL ESSENTIALLY BE ABANDONING ONE
OF ITS BEST TOOLS FOR MANAGING EV INFRASTRUCTURE COSTS
ALM can be defined broadly as a system designed to manage charging capacity
strategically among multiple electric vehicle supply equipment (“EVSE”) at a site. ALM is one
of the best tools available for the IOUs (under the Commission’s oversight) to manage utility
distribution system costs related to EV charging infrastructure buildout. ALM can support more
charging ports for the same amount of dollars, thus stretching investment dollars further and
faster towards meeting California’s transportation electrification goals. ALM can allow chargers
to be deployed across a broader set of locations where there may be physical limitations. It can
also help avoid distribution system costs altogether when installing new charging stations. Given
the scale of investment needed to meet California’s TE goals, it’s critical for the Commission to
explore all options for helping to manage these costs for the benefit of ratepayers. PG&E has
successfully shown that significant savings from ALM solutions in many cases arise from utility-
side distribution system upgrades, rather than customer-side costs.3
The Draft Resolution notes that AEE, SDG&E, and NRDC all argued that customers will
still have an incentive to pursue ALM to manage costs behind-the-meter make-ready costs.
However, it is VGIC’s understanding from conversations with utilities that the savings from
avoiding in-front-of-the-meter costs (e.g., deferred transformer upgrades) are in fact the largest
and most significant potential benefit of ALM.
Meanwhile, the Draft Resolution seeks to remove customer cost responsibility for these
types of distribution system upgrades, for at least 2 years and potentially longer. VGIC supports
this as a means to remove customer barriers to transportation electrification. However, this also
has the unintended consequence of disincentivizing ALM, which VGIC does not support and
needs to be addressed in the final Resolution. By implementing AB 841 through the approach
proposed in the Draft Resolution (which VGIC generally supports), the Commission will be
eliminating a large portion of the rationale for customers to pursue ALM, which would otherwise
benefit all ratepayers. This deficiency can and should be addressed through targeted
modifications to the Draft Resolution language.
To its credit, PG&E has expressed its intent to scale up its use of ALM solutions through
TE programs, however the details of this remain to be seen. Additionally, it is not clear how
PG&E would pursue ALM outside of TE programs (i.e., under the proposed new EV
3 See PG&E’s Panel presentation at the January 29, 2021 workshop on ALM pursuant to D. 20-12-029. See also
Appendix D of D2012029, https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Published/G000/M356/K212/356212163.pdf
3

August 25, 2021
Infrastructure Rule). Meanwhile, SCE and SDG&E have recently demonstrated through advice
letter processes an unwillingness to meaningfully support incremental ALM solutions through
their TE programs that could help manage utility-side distribution system costs.4 Notably, this
unwillingness came after OP 5 of D.20-12-029 directed SCE, SDG&E, and PG&E to
meaningfully incorporate ALM into all future rules and tariffs in accordance with Finding of
Fact (“FOF”) 13 and Conclusion of Law (“COL”) 18 of D.20-12-029:
“SCE, SDG&E, and PG&E shall, each, in all of its future applications for TE programs,
or rule or tariff to support TE infrastructure installation:
identify how it will deploy customer-side ALM at host sties through such
programs, rule, and/or tariff where appropriate because this technology will
support TE installation at equal or lesser costs than hardware-based electrical
capacity while meeting TE charging needs; and
describe its standard evaluation criteria to determine host sites where ALM would
benefit ratepayers by reducing costs while meeting host site needs for electric
vehicle charging.” 5
VGIC was encouraged by OP 5 of D.20-12-029 and the focus on ALM as a VGI strategy to
mitigate utility distribution system costs, and presented its proposed concept for enabling ALM
during the January 29, 2021 ALM workshop. However, the IOUs’ deficiency in implementing
OP 5 has led to growing concern among a broad range of stakeholders.6
Based on these facts, VGIC questions whether a robust approach towards ALM solutions
for utility-side costs will occur as EV infrastructure is deployed – especially under the proposed
approach which would grant a waiver to customer cost contributions for at least 2 years and
possibly longer. Unless the Commission establishes a new method for incentivizing customers to
pursue ALM solutions (if the customer is willing and able based on their charging needs), it will
essentially be abandoning one of its best tools for managing EV infrastructure costs. For these
reasons, VGIC strongly encourages the Commission to include in this resolution a robust follow
up process to develop and ultimately implement an approach to encouraging ALM. We believe a
sensible approach could involve a simple incentive-based approach that would share some of the
benefits of ALM with the customers implementing it, while passing most of these savings on to
all utility customers. This would be no different than the long-standing approach the Commission
has taken towards cost-effective energy efficiency measures as a means to keep utility customer
bills low.
4 See, for example, SDG&E Advice Letter 3811-E ALM / Energy Management Systems Plan for the Power Your
Drive Extension Program in Compliance with D.21-04-014. See also, Reply to VGIC’s Protest to SCE’s Advice
4438-E.
5 D.20-12-029, OP 5.
6 See, for example, VGI stakeholder letter re Enabling ALM to the CPUC, signed by Advanced Energy Economy,
AMPLY Power, Inc., California Energy Storage Alliance, Enel X North America, Inc., Greenlots, Mobility House,
Nuvve, Powerflex, Siemens, VGIC, and Veloce Energy. June 16, 2021.
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5dcde7af8ed96b403d8aeb70/t/60d2dbd25b043e4141b16164/1624431572513/
Enabling+ALM+-+Stakeholder+Letter+to+CPUC.pdf
4

August 25, 2021
IV. RESPONSE TO OTHER PARTIES’ POSITIONS ON VGIC’S PROPOSED ALM
APPROACH
The Draft Resolution acknowledges VGIC’s preliminary proposal for incentive-based approach
to encouraging ALM under an AB 841 implementation scheme that waives customer
contributions (like what the Draft Resolution proposes). The Draft Resolution states that several
parties critiqued this approach including TURN, who “argues that any costs for ALM be borne
by applicants not ratepayers” and PCE who argues that “the proposal still has many outstanding
questions.” Regarding TURN’s critique, VGIC notes that our proposal is intended to yield a net
benefit to ratepayers (not a cost). VGIC has also subsequently met with TURN to provide greater
clarity and TURN has expressed some willingness to consider this approach if additional details
can be spelled out through a subsequent process. Regarding PCE’s critique, VGIC agrees that
there are outstanding questions about our proposal which is why we proposed additional process.
We also note that PCE has touted the benefits of ALM, and the inherent incentive it has received
under the pre-841 paradigm by avoiding utility-side infrastructure costs.
V. VGIC STRONGLY RECOMMENDS THE COMMISSION ESTABLISH A
ROBUST FOLLOW-UP PROCESS TO THIS RESOLUTION FOR DEVELOPING
AND IMPLEMENTING ALM SOLUTIONS AS A MEANS TO MANAGE EV
INFRASTRUCTURE COSTS GOING FORWARD
As detailed above, unless the Commission sets forth a subsequent process to advance
ALM solutions, the Commission’s resolution will effectively eliminate a large portion of the
existing rationale for EV customers to pursue ALM, which would otherwise benefit all
customers. VGIC also notes that previous efforts to advance ALM through D.20-12-029 and the
January 29, 2021 ALM workshop have been unsuccessful to date.
VGIC strongly encourages the Commission to ensure the Final Resolution establishes a
robust follow-up process to develop and implement a method for incentivizing ALM solutions.
Specifically, VGIC recommends the Commission modify the Draft Resolution to direct the
Energy Division staff to host two workshops to collect party proposals for how to incentivize the
use of ALM to reduce EV infrastructure costs during the 2-year waiver, period (and any
subsequent period that includes an extended waiver or substantial allowances). Given the relative
complexity of solutions presented by stakeholders in the past, and as detailed in Section IV
above, VGIC believes that more stakeholder work is needed to further develop ALM concepts. A
single IOU-led workshop and subsequent proposal will likely be insufficient to simultaneously
fulfill the vision of both AB 841 and SB 676, while managing system costs. As such, VGIC
recommends the Energy Division staff host a workshop within two months and another within
five months. Notice of each workshop should be served to the service lists of R.18-12-006 and
R.21-06-017. VGIC also recommends the Energy Division staff enter into the record of R.18-12-
006 a brief report summarizing the party proposals prior to the workshop ordered by Draft
5

August 25, 2021
Resolution OP 5 (i.e., within eight months). This additional stakeholder work and record
development will critically inform the workshop ordered by Draft Resolution OP 5.
VI. VGIC RECOMMENDS THE COMMISSION MODIFY THE DRAFT
RESOLUTION TO ACKNOWLEDGE AND DEFINE AUTOMATED LOAD
MANAGEMENT
ALM can be utilized for different use cases, or to capture different value streams.
Notably, SCE has detailed a distinction between “Type 1” and “Type 2” ALM, explaining that
Type 1 ALM relates to load management at an EV supply equipment (EVSE) site where there is
no constraint to service (i.e., maximum connected EVSE load does not exceed site capacity).7
This is implemented throughout California today as a strategy for customers to manage their
utility bills in response to Time-of-Use rates, for example. SCE defines Type 2 ALM as “energy
management systems in which the connected load exceeds capacity, and the failure of such ALM
would lead to an unsafe condition.” 8 SCE notes that “Type 2 ALM could have a potential for
significant cost reduction and avoidance of major construction or upgrades by utilizing the
existing capacity to the largest extent.” 9
VGIC supports this key distinction between situations in which the maximum connected
load is less than site capacity (Type 1 ALM) and situations in which the maximum connected
load exceeds site capacity (Type 2 ALM). In seeking clarity and considering recommendations
for strategies to promote Type 2 ALM, additional definitions of ALM “subtypes” are also
necessary to capture the differences between when the maximum connected load exceeds service
capacity versus customer electric panel size. Type 2A ALM should be used to describe
situations in which maximum connected load exceeds site capacity, and customers have an
inherent incentive to use load management to save on customer-side costs (e.g., panel upgrades).
To our knowledge, this is done today at several sites in California to save customers costs on
panel upgrades. Meanwhile, Type 2B ALM should be used to describe situations in which
maximum connected load exceeds site capacity, and the use of load management is incentivized
as a means to reduce utility-side costs (e.g., service drop or transformer upgrades). PG&E has
reported on their efforts to implement Type 2B ALM as part of its EV Charge Network program.
In their recent advice letters described above, the IOUs have pointed to the existence of
Type 1 ALM as a reason not to pursue incremental Type 2 ALM. However, Type 2 ALM stands
to provide substantially greater benefits to all customers. VGIC recommends that the Draft
Resolution be modified to include a definition for ALM that includes the Type 1, Type 2a, and
7 SCE, Presentation on Transportation Electrification, Charging Infrastructure Programs, Energy Management
Systems, presented at EPRI IWC on March 20, 2019. See also Reply to The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council’s
Protest to Southern California Edison Company’s Advice 4439-E. April 8, 2021. Page 2.
8 Ibid.
9 Ibid.
6

August 25, 2021
Type 2b distinctions. We further recommend that the IOUs be required to include a definition
that also defines each of these subtypes within their EV Infrastructure Rules.
VII. CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE AGENCIES HAVE RECENTLY PROPOSED
UPDATED RULES TO ALLOW AUTOMATED LOAD MANAGEMENT AS A
CODE COMPLIANCE OPTION
Several California state agencies recently submitted proposed actions (code changes) that are
intended for inclusion in the 2022 California Building Standards Code, Title 24, scheduled for
publication in July 2022 with an effective date of January 2023.10 These agencies include the
Building Standards Commission (BSC), the Division of State Architect, and the Department of
Housing and Community Development. In each of these proposed building code revisions, the
agencies have proposed new language regarding the definition and use of automatic load
management systems. For example, in the BSC proposed changes, section 5.106.5.3.3 describes
how the use of automatic load management systems can allow the minimum required amperage
for EV charging spaces to be reduced from 40 amperes to 30 amperes.11 This demonstrates that
ALM is being pursued by other California decision-makers as a viable option to reduce demand
on the power system. However, such efforts will be less effective if there is a reduced customer
incentive to pursue them.
VIII. IT IS CRITICAL THAT THE EV INFRASTRUCTURE RULES DO NOT
ARBITRARILY PUSH CUSTOMERS TOWARD REQUIRING A SEPARATE
SERVICE OR METER, AS SEPARATING EV FROM SITE LOAD OBSTRUCTS
IMPLEMENTATION OF VGI STRATEGIES PER D.20-12-029
As VGIC understands, the proposed EV Infrastructure Rules apply to customers
receiving EV service separately from their existing service. While some customers may
ultimately require a separate service drop, VGIC believes this may only represent a fraction of
locations if load management solutions are effectively leveraged. VGIC notes the importance of
comingling EV and site load as a means to develop a meaningful baseline for demand response
participation and providing load against which bidirectional EV/EVSE configurations can
offset.
To the extent that the EV infrastructure rules eliminate customer costs for this separate service,
they may also unintentionally push customers towards a charging solution that would effectively
eliminate EV demand response participation options. This would be counterproductive
10 https://www.dgs.ca.gov/BSC/Rulemaking/2021-Triennial-Code-Adoption-Cycle/2021-Public-
comments/ACCESS-GREEN-Public-Comment-Page-2021
11 https://www.dgs.ca.gov/-/media/Divisions/BSC/03-Rulemaking/2021-Triennial-Cycle/2021-Public-
Comment-Periods/2021-ACCESS-Public-Comment/BSC/BSC-03-21-ET-PT11-
45day.docx?la=en&hash=70E74AE5D10B2EAF44D71A3BB03971680DC8ACAF
7

August 25, 2021
California’s current grid reliability issues and efforts under way to address extreme summer
weather events as part of the Emergency Reliability Rulemaking (R. 20-11-003).
As such, VGIC strongly recommends that the Commission should take bold action in other
proceedings and in the future to advance TE rules, tariffs, applications, frameworks, and plans
(i.e., the Draft TEF) that enable comingled EV and site load, including the use of submetering
via EVSE or EV telematics to measure consumption and discharging for settlement purposes.
This is key to unlocking VGI and fulfilling the vision of SB 676 and VGI strategies adopted in
D.20-12-029.
IX. CONCLUSION
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit these comments and looks forward to working
with the Commission and stakeholders.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Ed Burgess
Ed Burgess
Senior Policy Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
Date: August 25, 2021
8

August 25, 2021
Appendix A: Proposed Redline Edits to Draft Resolution
Page 41:
13. Offering of Load Management Tools
The IOUs’ proposals to not include load management as a condition of taking
advantage of the new EV Infrastructure Rules is reasonable at this time. However,
IOUs shall offer and discuss with each applicant available IOU and third-party load
management solutions including load management solutions that could defer utility-
side infrastructure costs.
Pages 44-45:
The IOUs within their Tier 2 AL should outline which load management solutions they
will offer applicants and how they plan to update this list over time. This list should
include not only Type 1, but also Type 2b load management solutions. It should also
include a detailed description of how the IOUs plan to incentivize customers to adopt
Type 2b ALM while the 2 year waiver (and any future allowances) is in effect.
Page 45:
14. Enrollment in a Time-Variant Rate
SDG&E’s proposal to require applicants to be enrolled on a TOU rate is reasonable
and should be applied to all of the IOUs’ EV Infrastructure Rules. TOU rates
should not be considered a substitute for other types of load management solutions,
including Type 2b.
Page 54:
Order Paragraph 3:
e. Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Southern California Edison Company, and San
Diego Gas & Electric Company must each modify the definition of electric vehicle
within the Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Rules to include the same referenced definition
of electric vehicles from Decision (D.) 20-09-025.
f. Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Southern California Edison Company, and San
Diego Gas & Electric Company must each include a definition for load management
9

August 25, 2021
within the Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Rules. This definition must include the
following subtypes of load management approaches:
● Type 1: Maximum connected load is less than site capacity (e.g. time varying rates)
● Type 2a: Maximum connected load exceeds site capacity and load management is
used to save on customer-side costs.
● Type 2b: Maximum connected load exceeds site capacity and load management is
used to save on uitlity-side costs.
h. Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Southern California Edison Company, and San
Diego Gas & Electric Company must each update their Electric Vehicle Infrastructure
Rules to reflect that as a default, participants will be enrolled on the commercial time-
variant electric vehicle rate that each investor-owned utility offers, but that applicants
may choose to change to another time-variant rate. Time-varying enrollments pursuant to
this paragraph may not be used as a substitute for Type 2b load management solutions.
Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Southern California Edison Company, and San Diego Gas &
Electric Company shall each submit their expected revenue requirement and rate impact resulting
from the EV Infrastructure Rules through the end of 2024.
Page 56:
Ordering Paragraph 4:
g. Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Southern California Edison Company, and San
Diego Gas & Electric Company must outline which IOU and third-party load
management solutions they will offer customers taking service under their Electric
Vehicle Infrastructure Rules, and how they plan to update this list over time. This list
should include not only Type 1, but also Type 2b load management solutions. It should
also include a detailed description of how the IOUs plan to incentivize customers to adopt
Type 2b ALM while the 2-year waiver (and any future allowances) is in effect.
Page 56:
Ordering Paragraph 5:
5. Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Southern California Edison Company, and San
Diego Gas & Electric Company must host a workshop to discuss the development of a
proposal for an allowance structure within eight months of the adoption of this
Resolution. The Energy Division staff shall host a workshop within two months and a
workshop within five months to collect and discuss party proposals for an allowance
structure. Notice of each workshop should be served to R.18-12-006 and R.21-06-017.
10

August 25, 2021
Following these workshops, the Energy Division staff shall enter into the record of R.18-
12-006 a short report summarizing the party proposals presented during these workshops
and any feedback provided during the workshops. Following the IOU-hosted workshop,
Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Southern California Edison Company, and San Diego
Gas & Electric Company in coordination with Energy Division staff, ratepayer advocates,
and other stakeholders shall submit a proposal for an allowance structure no later than
180 days after the workshop. They must file the joint allowance structure proposal within
Rulemaking (R.) 18-12-006, or any successor proceeding. No allowance structure or
customer contribution requirement will be incorporated into the Electric Vehicle
Infrastructure Rules for the first two years of implementation, however, the Commission
may establish an allowance structure in the future. The workshop, as well as the
subsequent proposal, must take into consideration the following:
Page 57:
Ordering Paragraph 5:
d. Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Southern California Edison Company, and San
Diego Gas & Electric Company shall consider how load management may impact the
allowance value and the total expected grid impact and/or revenue resulting from the
installation of Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment. If the proposal includes a continued
waiver (or full allowance) of customer contributions beyond 2 years, it must also include
a detailed proposal for how Type 2b load management solutions can be incentivized.
11