BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to
Continue the Development of Rates Rulemaking 18-12-006
and Infrastructure for Vehicle (Filed December 13, 2018)
Electrification.
REPLY COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION
COUNCIL ON THE ASSIGNED COMMISSIONER’S RULING
REGARDING IMPLEMENTATION OF ASSEMBLY BILL 841
Edward Burgess
Senior Policy Director
Zach Woogen
Policy Specialist
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400
Berkeley, California 94704
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
February 19, 2021
1

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to
Continue the Development of Rates Rulemaking 18-12-006
and Infrastructure for Vehicle (Filed December 13, 2018)
Electrification.
REPLY COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION
COUNCIL ON THE ASSIGNED COMMISSIONER’S RULING
REGARDING IMPLEMENTATION OF ASSEMBLY BILL 841
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission” or “CPUC”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) 1
hereby submits these reply comments on the Assigned Commissioner’s Ruling Regarding
Implementation of Assembly Bill (“AB”) 841, issued on January 15, 2021.
I. Introduction.
VGIC is a 501(c)6 membership-based advocacy group committed to advancing the role
of electric vehicles (“EV”) and vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”) through policy development,
education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to a decarbonized transportation
and electric sector by ensuring the value from EV deployments and flexible EV charging and
1 VGIC member companies include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., Connect California LLC, Enel X North
America, Inc., Fermata, LLC., Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, Ford Motor Company, General Motors Company, Nissan
North America, Inc., Nuvve Corporation, The Mobility House, Toyota Motor North America, Inc., and Ossiaco, Inc.
The views expressed in these Comments are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all of the
individual VGIC member companies or supporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/).
2

discharging is recognized and compensated in support of achieving a more reliable, affordable,
and efficient electric grid.
II. REQUIRING INVESTOR-OWNED UTILITIES TO OFFER AN ALM
OPTION IS NOT THE SAME AS REQUIRING CUSTOMERS TO
IMPLEMENT ALM SOLUTIONS.
In opening comments, several parties, including VGIC, advocated against requiring
customers to implement ALM solutions as a condition to take advantage of the EV Infrastructure
Rules to be proposed by each IOU pursuant to AB 841.2 This is true whether it is an explicit
requirement or a de facto requirement due to the significant customer costs that could imposed
due to some Commission-assumed “ALM potential” at host sites. However, VGIC reiterates that
requiring investor-owned utilities (“IOUs”) to offer an ALM option under their respective EV
Infrastructure Rules to be proposed pursuant to AB 841 is not the same as requiring customers to
actually adopt ALM solutions, and could be warranted. Ultimately, customers should be
provided with the opportunity to decide whether an ALM solution is right for them based on
their specific site needs, the commercially-available products, and the applicable electric rules
and tariffs, including any opt-in components of the EV Infrastructure Rules intended to promote
ALM. VGIC respectfully requests the Commission highlight this distinction to promote clarity
and ensure parties are operating under a shared set of assumptions.
III. VGIC BELIEVES THE ALM INCENTIVE STRUCTURE IT PROPOSED IN
OPENING COMMENTS IS IN ALIGNMENT WITH OTHER PARTIES’
COMMENTS.
2 See, for example, Joint Comments of Center for Community Action and Environmental Justice, East Yard
Communities for Environmental Justice, Sierra Club, and Union of Concerned Scientists, Opening Comments of
San Diego Gas & Electric, Opening Comments of the Natural Resources Defense Council, the Coalition of
California Utility Employees, Environmental Defense Fund, Siemens, Greenlots, Enel X North America Inc., and
EVBox Inc., Opening Comments of ChargePoint, and Opening Comments of Electrify America.
3

In opening comments, San Diego Gas & Electric (“SDG&E”) states,
“providing incentives for load reduction beyond existing EV rates—especially
ones based on the avoided cost of some hypothetical (“kW”) baseline—would be
difficult to fairly determine for all customers. And it could open up possibilities
for gaming by customers overstating their hypothetical maximum load.”3
VGIC acknowledges, and largely agrees with, SDG&E’s concern over providing incentives
based on a utility-determined, site-specific avoided cost calculation and appreciates the
challenges this presents in terms of additional complexity and potential gaming. VGIC notes that
it initially presented its ALM incentive as a preliminary concept at the January 29th, 2021
workshop, which we believe are the basis for SDG&E’s comments. Since that time, VGIC has
had further discussions with stakeholders and further refined its proposal as included in Opening
Comments. This updated proposal in Opening Comment features two possible incentive
components: 1) an upfront incentive for ALM that can avoid non-demand upgrades via use of
existing services and 2) an ongoing incentive (via a pre-determined bill credit) for ALM that
reduces demand on the distribution system. VGIC believes this updated proposal offers a more
straightforward approach that 1) provides more certainty and simplicity to site hosts, as is the
intent of AB 841, 2) eliminates the potential for gaming, and 3) still achieves the goal of
encouraging ALM to reduce distribution system costs.
The ongoing incentive component proposed in our Opening Comments is roughly based
on a similar concept to the distribution circuit adder in SDG&E’s Power Your Drive VGI rate,
though it would be in the form of a credit rather than an adder. Here, we provide an additional
consideration for an ongoing incentive structure that would better reflect the avoided costs of
3 Opening Comments of SDG&E at 14.
4

secondary distribution system upgrades, which has been a major focus of recent procedural
discussions around ALM deployment, instead of tying the ongoing incentive to primary
distribution system impacts (although VGIC posits that a similar incentive structure for avoided
primary distribution costs could also be applied in parallel). AB 841 requires the IOUs to track
incurred costs in a memorandum account for review and recovery through General Rate Cases.
We posit that the IOUs could use these tracked costs to develop a demand-indexed cost schedule
associated with secondary infrastructure for EV charging installed pursuant to AB 841. These
demand-indexed costs could then in turn be used as a proxy for site-specific avoided costs and be
used as the basis for ongoing ALM incentives.
In opening comments, SDG&E also notes “requiring ALM assessments will increase the
complexity to the SDG&E EV Infrastructure Rule and deter customers from adding EV
charging.”4 VGIC agrees with SDG&E that dedicated up-front ALM and avoided cost
assessments could slow down deployment of necessary TE infrastructure. Instead, a standardized
approach providing upfront incentives or known bill credits to customers that opt-in to an ALM
option to utilize existing service would avoid significant delays to a customer’s ability to take
advantage of IOUs’ EV Infrastructure Rule. Under VGIC’s updated proposal (as detailed in
opening comments and further developed here), an ALM assessment would not be needed for
each site, and instead could leveraging information already submitted to the IOUs for the upfront
payment and/or bill credit.
4 Opening comments of SDG&E at 14.
5

IV. SUBSCRIPTION RATES ARE NOT AN ADEQUATE SUBSTITUTE FOR AN
ALM INCENTIVE.
In opening comments, Pacific Gas and Electric (“PG&E”) and SDG&E argue that
subscription rates already incent ALM, as customers can save money by reducing their
maximum demand to a lower demand block and, in turn, reduce their subscription charge.5
VGIC agrees that a subscription rate structure can encourage load reduction via ALM in some
cases. However, VGIC does not agree that subscription rate structures encourage ALM in all
cases, nor that subscription rates on their own promote utilizing ALM as a way to incorporate
EV charging load on existing service connections and avoid the need to install new, separately
metered service.
There are two key aspects to be considered here. First, one of the most effective ways to
reduce distribution system costs associated with EVs would be to leverage ALM to use an
existing service to accommodate new charging stations. VGIC recommends first that this option
be available to all customers who take advantage of programs and tariffs arising from AB 841
implementation. Since subscription rates are mainly targeted at separately metered EV charging
– as, for instance, is currently required for eligibility for PG&E’s Business EV rate – to the
extent that “separate metering” also implies separate utility-side infrastructure6 that is provided
for by AB 841, this provides little incentive for customers to pursue ALM. In contrast, VGIC’s
proposal in opening comments contemplates an upfront incentive for customers who successfully
5 Opening Comments of PG&E at 8 and Opening Comments of SDG&E at 14.
6 We note that Decision 19-10-055 recognizes the potential for EVSE submetering enable access to the PG&E CEV
rate: “This decision also recognizes the role that submetering can play in resolving the issues faced by PG&E and
those CEV customers that would otherwise be required to install a separate meter. If submetering becomes an
approved and accepted means of metering EVSE load, then a separate meter should no longer be required to take
service on a CEV rate. This applies to all eligible CEV rate customers, including transit agencies.” (p. 38)
6

use ALM to fit EV charging onto an existing service, thereby avoiding the need for new non-
demand-related service upgrades (e.g. meter, service drop). VGIC’s proposal would also comply
with the SB 676 requirement that investments in transportation electrification do not foreclose
the VGI potential of those investments,7 and also that VGI is deployed to provide ratepayer
benefits by increasing electrical grid asset utilization and avoid otherwise necessary distribution
infrastructure upgrades.8
Second, if a new service is ultimately pursued to accommodate new EV charging load,
VGIC agrees that subscription rates can encourage ALM as a means to reduce any immediate
demand-related distribution upgrade costs directly linked to installing the new service. However,
in this instance, subscription rates would not encourage any ongoing load management activities
that could benefit the larger distribution grid over time.9 In fact, they would likely do the
opposite by giving customers little to no benefit for minimizing day-to-day charging demand
other than avoiding overage charges. Thus, to the extent that any subscription rates recover
distribution system costs beyond what is immediately required to interconnect a new charging
station, they provide a disincentive for ALM. As such, VGIC believes it is still appropriate to
consider an incentive mechanism for ALM for subscription rate customers but suggests that this
could be limited to reflect the set of primary distribution costs that are spread across all retail
customers (including EV customers), rather than those distribution costs that are specific to new
EV services. Finally, VGIC notes that not all customers types may be eligible for a subscription
7 Public Utilities Code Sec. 740.16(a)(2)
8 Public Utilities Code Sec. 740.16(b)(1)
9 To be clear, VGIC does not believe that AB 841 implementation would require either a new service or a new meter
in all cases. Instead, the installation of a new meter or new service drop should be an option presented to the
customer and a decision made in coordination with the utility according to the site-specific needs.
7

rate option and thus it may be helpful to offer an incentive for those customers not eligible for
such rates.
V. VGIC RECOMMENDS THE COMMISSION OUTLINE NEXT STEPS TO
INCORPORATE AN ALM INCENTIVE INTO ELECTRIC RULES ONCE
KEY PROGRAM DESIGN ISSUES ARE RESOLVED.
In opening comments, several parties express that it is premature to explore load
management as part of the initial implementation of AB 841.10 While VGIC believes ALM
technologies are ready for widespread implementation, we do agree that it may be premature to
include an ALM option in the initial EV Infrastructure Rules required by AB 841 since several
important elements of the ALM incentive design need to be further developed, and may require
more time than AB 841 would allow. As such, VGIC recommends any Commission Order
related to implementation of AB 841 include Ordering Paragraphs that detail the steps and
timeline needed to both 1) develop the ALM incentive mechanism and 2) incorporate this into
the EV Infrastructure Rules and/or IOU tariffs at a future date. For example, following
implementation of the IOUs’ EV Infrastructure Rules, the Commission could host a stakeholder
workshop by May 2021 to address outstanding questions related to an ALM incentive structure
and solicit other stakeholder proposals. This could be followed by a comment period and
ultimately a Commission direction in Q3 2021 requiring IOUs update EV Infrastructure Rules to
include an optional ALM incentive shortly thereafter.
VI. CONCLUSION.
10 See, for example, Opening Comments of PG&E at 7, Opening Comments of SDG&E at 13, and Opening
Comments of the Natural Resources Defense Council, the Coalition of California Utility Employees, Environmental
Defense Fund, Siemens, Greenlots, Enel X North America Inc., and EVBox Inc. at 9.
8

VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit these reply comments on AB 841
implementation. We look forward to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders
on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
Edward Burgess
Senior Policy Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
February 19, 2021
9