June 17, 2021
CPUC Energy Division Tariff Unit
505 Van Ness Avenue
San Francisco, California 94102
EDTariffUnit@cpuc.ca.gov
Re: Response of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council to Advice Letter 3774-E of
San Diego Gas & Electric Company, Advice Letter 4510-E of Southern
California Edison Company, and Advice Letter 6209-E of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company
Dear Sir or Madam:
Pursuant to the provisions of General Order 96-B, the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
(“VGIC”) hereby submits this response to the above-referenced Advice Letter 3774-E of San Diego
Gas & Electric Company (“SDG&E”), Advice Letter 4510-E of Southern California Edison
Company (“SCE”), and Advice Letter 6209-E of Pacific Gas and Electric Company (“PG&E”),
Joint Advice Letter Proposing Interconnection Pathway for Vehicle-to-Grid Alternate Current
Projects and Implementation Steps for Direct Current Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment Projects,
Pursuant to Decision 20-09-035 (“Joint Advice Letter”), submitted on May 28, 2021.
I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND.
With the unanimous approval of Decision (“D.”) 20-09-035 on September 24, 2020, VGIC
commended the Commission for advancing vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”) through its crucial
clarification regarding the treatment of vehicle-to-grid direct current (“V2G DC”) systems under
Rule 21. The Decision adopted Issue 23 sub-proposals that explicitly made clear that V2G DC
electric vehicle supply equipment (“EVSE”) can interconnect under Rule 21 if the relevant Rule 21
requirements are met. The Decision also adopted an Issue 23 sub-proposal to allow V2G DC EVSEs
to operate first in load-only mode (or “V1G”) and later switch to bi-directional mode after receiving
a Rule 21 interconnection agreement and permission to operate (“PTO”).
In 2019, the Commission worked with stakeholders to convene a V2G alternating current
(“V2G AC”) technical subgroup. Subgroup participants worked diligently to identify gaps between
relevant industry standards and Rule 21 requirements, and produced a detailed technical report
highlighting key gaps that need to be addressed in the development of a standard V2G AC
interconnection pathway. In recognition of these gaps, the September Decision did not adopt a
standard interconnection pathway, instead directing IOUs to develop a temporary interconnection

June 17, 2021
Page 2 of 5
pathway for V2G alternating current (“AC”) pilots that would be exempt from Rule 21 requirements.
The Decision directed investor-owned utilities (“IOUs”) to work with stakeholders to develop a
temporary interconnection pathway for V2G AC pilots. The IOUs and parties collaborated through
a series of workshops to identify the appropriate temporary pathway that ensures safety and
meaningfully supports V2G AC pilots. During the March 29th V2G workshop, IOUs presented their
near-final proposed temporary interconnection pathway for V2G AC pilots as well as their proposed
implementation plan for the interconnection of V2G DC systems in uni-directional mode.
VGIC appreciates the IOUs’ good faith efforts and flexibility during the workshops and
development of the proposal in the Joint Advice Letter. The Joint Advice Letter represents a
significant step toward widespread V2G adoption and is an encouraging reflection of stakeholder
efforts. VGIC is pleased to see that both the V2G DC and V2G AC implementation steps are
generally consistent with the preliminary details shared previously by the IOUs. VGIC supports the
Joint Advice Letter as filed, but highlights in this response several critical areas related to V2G DC
that could benefit from additional clarification before full implementation by the IOUs, including:
 Process for V2G DC systems to interconnect in bidirectional mode from the outset
(i.e., go straight to Rule 21 process, skipping uni-directional mode)
 Standard date used for the 5-year grace period for accepting out-of-date EVSE
certification
 IOUs’ intent to update interconnection application portals to accommodate V2G DC
EVSE specifications
 General streamlining and consistent treatment of V2G DC as a DER interconnecting
under Rule 21 on a level playing field with other DERs
In addition, VGIC is concerned over the potential interaction between the proposed V2G AC
temporary interconnection pathway and SDG&E’s existing interconnection handbook. VGIC thus
submits this response to the Joint Advice Letter and respectfully requests that implementation of
V2G DC and V2G AC pathways not be unduly delayed due to the issues raised herein. VGIC offers
its time and resources to Energy Division staff, Commissioners, IOUs, and other stakeholders to
support addressing each issue in a timely manner.
II. DISCUSSION: V2G DC INTERCONNECTION.
A. IOUs should explicitly clarify the process for V2G DC to interconnect in
bidirectional mode from the outset (i.e., go straight to Rule 21).
VGIC commends the Commission and IOUs for working to establish a pathway for
V2G DC EVSE to switch from uni-directional to bidirectional mode upon completing a Rule
21 review process and receiving a PTO. As outlined in the Joint Advice Letter, V2G DC

June 17, 2021
Page 3 of 5
systems intending to switch from uni-directional mode to bidirectional mode must
demonstrate certification to the UL Power Control System (“PCS”) Certifications
Requirements Decision (“CRD”). However, customers and benefits would also benefit from
a straight-to-Rule 21 option that would not require certification to UL PCS CRD. Based on
VGIC’s understanding, nothing in the Joint Advice Letter or Rule 21 strictly prohibits V2G
DC EVSE from interconnecting under Rule 21 in bidirectional mode from the outset, but
there is also no statement or process detailed in the Joint Advice Letter to demonstrate that
the potential pathway is available to customers and vendors. Therefore, VGIC respectfully
requests that the IOUs work to clarify that a straight-to-Rule 21 pathway is available to all
V2G DC EVSE systems that comply with the technical requirements of Rule 21. The IOUs’
V2G DC implementation details should present two clear and distinct interconnection
pathways for V2G DC EVSE systems: (1) request interconnection in bidirectional mode
under Rule 21 from the outset by meeting all relevant Rule 21 requirements, or (2) connect
in uni-directional mode with UL PCS CRD certification and then request Rule 21
interconnection and switch to bidirectional mode once PTO has been granted. This clarity
will facilitate customer/vendor understanding and ensure that the IOUs’ skilled but finite
interconnection staff can swiftly resolve any potential ambiguity regarding whether a
particular V2G DC EVSE configuration can proceed to Rule 21 review process without
demonstrating compliance with UL PCS CRD. This clarification is critical to the near-term
success of V2G DC EVSE interconnection.
B. IOUs should clarify how the 5-year grace period for accepting legacy EVSE
certification is determined.
VGIC commends the IOUs’ proposed grace period for V2G DC EVSE systems, in
which IOUs will accommodate the certification for EVSE that is requesting interconnection
up to five years after the “model year.” VGIC appreciates the flexibility and believes this
structure should be implemented to address potential timing concerns raised by allowing a
two-step process of V1G-only followed by V2G mode. However, VGIC recommends the
IOUs work to clarify what is meant by “EVSE model year.” Alternatively, the IOUs should
consider using another standard date to mark the beginning of the 5-year grace period. VGIC
recommends an EVSE’s commercial operation date (“COD”) be used as the starting point
for the 5-year grace period, as COD represents a simple, understandable, and easily
accessible data point.
C. IOUs should clarify whether they intend to update interconnection application
portals to accommodate V2G DC EVSE information.
The Joint Advice Letter states: “Note: each Utility’s interconnection portals may
need to be updated to allow precise identification of EVSE information.” 1 It is unclear from
this language whether the IOUs are signaling a clear intent to update their interconnection
portals or merely identifying that this task may need to be done. VGIC requests that each
IOU clarify whether it intends to update its interconnection portal. If updates do need to be
1 Joint Advice Letter at 4.

June 17, 2021
Page 4 of 5
made, VGIC strongly recommends the IOUs both identify and implement any updates to
interconnection portals that are needed to facilitate V2G DC EVSE interconnection.
D. IOUs should align V2G DC EVSE interconnection process with other DERs
interconnecting under Rule 21 to ensure a level playing field and streamline
interconnection.
Prior to D.20-09-035, V2G DC EVSE were not explicitly prohibited from
interconnecting under Rule 21. D.20-09-035 clarified that V2G DC EVSE – a type of DER
– could interconnect under the same guidelines governing stationary energy storage systems.
In Section II.A above, VGIC details the importance of having IOUs make clear to customers
and vendors that V2G DC EVSE may seek bidirectional mode from the outset via the Rule
21 interconnection process. Without this explicit clarification, VGIC is concerned that
customers and vendors may be nudged toward the two-step process of sequentially acquiring
service as a V1G resource and then seeking interconnection as a V2G resource. VGIC posits
this may nearly double the amount of time required for a V2G DC EVSE to operate in
bidirectional mode compared to the time required for a similarly-sized stationary energy
storage system.
As a related issue, it is important that the review timeline and inspection process for
Rule 21 interconnection be consistent between V2G DC EVSE and stationary energy storage
systems. VGIC recognizes that IOUs may need some time to gain familiarity and comfort
with new V2G DC EVSE configurations, whereas stationary energy storage systems have
been moving through Rule 21 interconnection processes for several years. VGIC respectfully
request the IOUs plan for – and work toward – aligning the Rule 21 interconnection review
timeline and process for V2G DC EVSE with that of stationary energy storage. Once IOUs
gain more comfort and familiarity with V2G DC EVSE products and configurations, VGIC
recommends implementing virtual inspections and other streamlining measures. Notably,
V2G DC EVSE product adoption may outpace stationary energy storage deployment due to
several factors, including low incremental costs of V2G equipment relative to stationary
energy storage system costs and non-monetary factors that impact customer’s choice to
purchase vehicles and charging equipment.
Lastly, the IOUs should remain clear and consistent about the separate treatment of
V2G DC and V2G AC systems. V2G DC EVSE interconnecting under Rule 21 is not a pilot
or temporary, but rather a standard and routine pathway. VGIC recommends both the
Commission and IOUs continue to distinguish in all interconnection-related efforts between
these two pathways so as to ensure the V2G DC EVSE can interconnect under a standard,
routine pathway.
III. DISCUSSION: V2G AC INTERCONNECTION.
A. SDG&E should clarify whether a secondary relay is needed for V2G AC pilots.

June 17, 2021
Page 5 of 5
VGIC is pleased to see that the V2G AC pilot eligibility criteria and temporary
interconnection pathway are both consistent with the consensus proposal developed
alongside a range of stakeholders since the September Decision. The Joint Advice Letter
details a temporary interconnection pathway for eligible V2G AC pilots that uses a relay
programmed with voltage and frequency settings, which are found in the IOUs’
interconnection handbooks.2 Notably, SDG&E’s interconnection handbook states the
following:3
“Whenever primary relays or protective devices are out of service,
backup or secondary relays must be available to clear faults. When
restoring any relays that have been out of service, the Generator’s
designated representative shall verify that the contacts of any such
relays, which are normally open, are in fact open. The Generator must
ensure that relays do not have standing trip output.”
VGIC is concerned with the potential for V2G AC pilots in SDG&E service territory
to require both a primary and secondary relay. This may be cost prohibitive and effectively
undermine the effort to facilitate V2G AC pilots and, in turn, VGI broadly. VGIC respectfully
request SDG&E consider exempting V2G AC pilots from this secondary relay requirement.
Given the relays will be IOU-approved, VGIC believes there may exist justification for this
exemption, as IOU-approval may help to mitigate the risk of the primary relay failing, as
noted in the SDG&E handbook.
IV. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity submit this response to the Joint Advice Letter. We look
forward to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Policy Specialist
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
cc: Greg Anderson, SDG&E (GAnderson@sdge.com and SDGETariffs@sdge.com)
Shinjini C. Menon, SCE (AdviceTariffManager@sce.com)
Tara S. Kaushik, c/o Karyn Gansecki (Karyn.Gansecki@sce.com)
Sidney Dietz , c/o Megan Lawson (PGETariffs@pge.com)
Service list R.17-07-007
2 Joint Advice Letter at 6.
3 SDG&E Interconnection Handbook Section 5.2 Voltage Control Operation and Other Service Requirements at 25.
https://www.sdge.com/more-information/customer-generation/electric-rule-21/distribution-interconnection-handbook