Comments of the Vehicle Grid Integration Council (VGIC) on the California Energy
Commission (CEC) Electric School Bus Bidirectional Infrastructure Funding Concept
Workshop
Docket # 19-TRAN-02
Medium- and Heavy-Duty Zero-Emission Vehicles and Infrastructure
Ed Burgess
Senior Policy Director
Zach Woogen
Policy Manager
VEHICLE GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
10265 Rockingham Dr.
Suite #100-4061
Sacramento, California 95827
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
Filed: September 30, 2022
Comments submitted via:
https://efiling.energy.ca.gov/EComment/EComment.aspx?docketnumber=19-TRAN-02

September 30, 2022
I. Introduction
The Vehicle Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”)1, a 501(c)6 membership-based advocacy
group, is pleased to provide comments in response to the California Energy Commission (“CEC”)
Workshop on Electric School Bus Bidirectional Infrastructure Funding Concept hosted on
September 13, 2022.
VGIC is committed to advancing the role of electric vehicles (“EVs”) and vehicle-grid
integration (“VGI”) through policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC
supports the transition to decarbonized transportation and electric sectors by ensuring the value
from EV deployments and flexible EV charging and discharging is recognized and compensated
to achieve a more reliable, affordable, and efficient electric grid.
II. Recommended enhancements to the Electric School Bus Bidirectional
Infrastructure Funding Concept.
VGIC greatly appreciates the CEC staff’s focus and thoughtful development of the funding
concept presented during the September 13th workshop. VGIC generally supports the funding
concept but recommends targeted modifications and enhancements to address critical gaps in the
VGI market, detailed below.
A. Funding Level
VGIC supports the CEC staff’s funding concept but recommends that a higher level of
funding is provided. Bidirectional charging equipment can unlock:
 Customer and community resilience by providing clean, low-cost backup power
solutions
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., Customized Energy Solutions,
dcbel, Enel X North America, Inc., ENGIE NA, Fermata Energy, FlexCharging, FLO EV Charging, Ford Motor
Company, FreeWire Technologies, Inc., General Motors, Kaluza, Nissan Group of North America, Nuvve Holding
Corporation, Sacramento Municipal Utility District, Stellantis N.V., Sunrun, Switch EV Ltd, The Mobility House,
Toyota Motor North America, Inc., Veloce Energy, Inc., Wallbox USA Inc., and WeaveGrid. The views expressed
in these Comments are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all individual VGIC
member companies or supporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/)
Vehicle Grid Integration Council Page 2 of 8
www.vgicouncil.org

September 30, 2022
 Customer bill management opportunities by discharging from a vehicle to meet site
load, performing energy arbitrage or demand charge management through vehicle-to-
building (“V2B”) discharge
 Revenue generation for customers and support for grid reliability and renewable energy
integration through vehicle-to-grid (“V2G”) exports. Customers can currently
participate in the ELRP EV/VGI Aggregation pathway and PG&E’s V2G Pilots.
Additionally, VGIC expects PG&E’s pending Day-Ahead Hourly Real Time Pricing
(“DAHRTP”) V2G export compensation mechanism settlement will be approved by
the CPUC on October 20th, which would provide the first compelling year-round V2G
export opportunity for customers as early as October 2023.2 Lastly, SDG&E’s
anticipated Export Compensation Pilot3 and the CPUC staff’s proposed CalFUSE
concept4 will likely provide additional opportunities for export compensation soon.
Despite the customer and grid benefits of bidirectional charging, deployment numbers and product
offerings remain relatively nascent. The incremental costs of installing bidirectional chargers
instead of unidirectional charging remain high – prohibitive in many cases. The CEC’s proposed
funding concept will provide much-needed support to reduce the costs of purchasing and installing
bidirectional chargers and associated electrical equipment, including traditional make-ready
infrastructure and automatic transfer switches for backup power use cases. Bidirectional charging
equipment is not currently given incrementally higher funding under other CEC rebates or make-
ready programs. Although it is a type of energy storage, bidirectional charging equipment is not
deemed eligible for California’s Self-Generation Incentive Program. There exists an uneven level
of access to funding for bidirectional charging equipment compared to other charging equipment
and other energy storage systems. To level the playing field, the proposed funding concept would
provide $2-3 million per project for an expected 3-5 projects through a one-time grant funding
2 Proposed Decision Adopting Settlement on Export Compensation for Certain Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Customers. September 14, 2022. http://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/SearchRes.aspx?DocFormat=ALL&DocID=496924142
3 Prepared Supplemental Direct Testimony of Jeff DeTuri (Chapter 1) on Behalf of San Diego Gas & Electric
Company. August 15, 2022.
https://www.sdge.com/sites/default/files/regulatory/A2212016%20and%20RM_SDGE%20RTP%20Supplemental%
20JDTuri%20Chpt%201%20-%20Policy.pdf
4 Advanced Strategies for Demand Flexibility Management and Customer DER Compensation. June 22, 2022.
https://www.cpuc.ca.gov/-/media/cpuc-website/divisions/energy-division/documents/demand-
response/demand-response-workshops/advanced-der---demand-flexibility-management/ed-white-paper---
advanced-strategies-for-demand-flexibility-management.pdf
Vehicle Grid Integration Council Page 3 of 8
www.vgicouncil.org

September 30, 2022
opportunity (“GFO”). VGIC believes successful execution of the proposed funding concept will
yield significant benefits, including:
 Accelerate the electric school bus transition by lowering the total cost of ownership
for school bus fleets and, in turn, mitigating harmful pollution for society’s most
vulnerable and, in turn, reducing adverse health impacts for students
 Support the decarbonizing power grid by utilizing batteries that reduce the need for
natural gas peaker plants and facilitate additional deployment of renewable energy
resources
 Improve customer and community resiliency, for example, during public safety
power shutoffs
 Aid the grid when reliability is most threatened, for example, during increasingly
common extreme heat events
 Increase affordability of electricity by deferring or avoiding local distribution grid
infrastructure upgrades
 Fostering economic activity for California-based VGI companies and their employees
Given the broad scope of these benefits, VGIC urges the CEC to think expansively and take bold
action to support bidirectional charging infrastructure deployment and accelerate the deployment
of electric school buses broadly. For local education agencies, the decision to electrify their fleet
may initially seem obvious but is often abandoned once the total costs of doing so are made clear.
An essential tool to overcome this “sticker shock” is to unlock additional value propositions
through V2G export revenue opportunities and V2B backup power. Over time, VGIC expects
economies of scale and increased product offerings to reduce the costs of bidirectional charging
infrastructure. Meanwhile, California’s load-serving entities, the California Public Utilities
Commission, and CAISO will continue collaborating to expand access to V2G export options.
However, today’s V2G market remains relatively nascent.
VGIC recommends allocating significantly more funding for this GFO. Additionally, the
CEC should consider conducting a series of GFOs or establishing an ongoing bidirectional
charging infrastructure rebate program specifically marketed to school buses, rather than a single,
one-off $10 million GFO. VGIC notes the CEC has recently issued a proposed V2G equipment
adder funding concept and believes the two concepts could be merged into one much larger rebate
Vehicle Grid Integration Council Page 4 of 8
www.vgicouncil.org

September 30, 2022
program, perhaps with carveouts for certain use cases (e.g., school bus vs non-school bus). The
CEC could maintain flexibility to modify those carveouts at regular intervals (e.g., every two
years) based on the remaining budget and deployment levels for each use case. This would ensure
the critical benefits of V2G are realized much sooner.
B. Project Location Eligibility
VGIC appreciates the CEC’s focus on supporting resiliency in high fire threat districts
(“HFTD”) and agrees that bidirectional charging infrastructure is a critical part of the resiliency
toolkit. VGIC supports requiring the infrastructure to be “for either V2B or V2G utilization.”5
However, VGIC is concerned that limiting eligible projects to HFTD will impose a de facto
prioritization of V2B. This will result in missed opportunities to support the grid through V2G in
other locations, for example, congested areas of the grid where V2G exports may be especially
valuable in meeting local demand. Moreover, selecting sites and partnering with local education
agencies can be challenging in this early stage of market development. VGIC is concerned that the
proposed location requirements may make it more challenging to deploy bidirectional charging
infrastructure. Additionally, CEC staff presented a map of CAPCOA Small and Medium Air
Districts overlaid on a map of Tier 2 and Tier 3 HFTD. VGIC is unsure whether CEC is proposing
to further limit siting eligibility to locations that fall within both maps, and if so, the justification
for doing so is unclear.
VGIC encourages the CEC to avoid unnecessary siting restrictions that may only limit the
benefits and total deployment of bidirectional charging infrastructure. While we understand there
may be intent to prioritize the most vulnerable communities, this should be accomplished through
a scoring mechanism rather than explicitly excluding certain areas. VGIC strongly recommends
that the CEC not limit project eligibility to Tier 2 or Tier 3 HFTD or the CAPCOA Map of Small
and Medium Air Districts.
C. Minimum Bus Quantity
5 Funding Concept Slide 12.
Vehicle Grid Integration Council Page 5 of 8
www.vgicouncil.org

September 30, 2022
During the workshop, CEC staff proposed requiring local education agencies to “own and
operate a minimum of 10 bi-directional-capable electric school buses.”6 VGIC understands the
CEC’s intent to tap into significant energy storage capacity through this funding concept.
However, many school districts want to electrify their fleets incrementally over time. Finding a
local education agency that is planning to start out with 10 buses from the outset maybe
challenging. Therefore, VGIC believes the 10-bus minimum requirement may make it more
difficult to find sites and effectively achieve the funding concept’s goals.
D. Charging Equipment Capacity
Not all available bidirectional chargers – of which there is only a handful on the market –
would meet the proposed 60 kW minimum charging requirement. While some school buses have
large batteries and range, others operate on shorter routes and may use low-power DC. However,
these smaller battery buses and low-power bidirectional chargers can still provide V2B and V2G
services and should be considered eligible under this funding concept. Notably, these smaller
vehicles and chargers need similar electrical infrastructure upgrade costs. VGIC respectfully
requests that the CEC not impose any minimum charging requirement. Alternatively, VGIC
believes that the CEC could set a minimum charging requirement based on an analysis of
commercially available and upcoming bidirectional charging equipment to ensure the funding
requirements do not inadvertently pick market winners.
E. Charging Equipment UL Certification
The proposed funding concept would require that bidirectional chargers be certified to UL
1741 SB. Meanwhile, in the case of the investor-owned utility’s Emergency Load Reduction
Programs (“ELRP”), sites interconnecting to bidirectional DC chargers need to be certified to UL
1741, but not UL 1741 SA, UL 1741 SB, or any updated smart inverter standards established by
the Smart Inverter Working Group.7 Moreover, V2X DC sites interconnecting with investor-
owned utilities for purposes other than ELRP would need to have EVSE certified to UL 1741 SA,
6 Funding Concept Slide 14.
7 Phase 2 Decision Directing Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Southern California Edison Company, and San Diego
Gas & Electric Company to Take Actions to Prepare for Potential Extreme Weather in the Summers of 2022 and
2023. December 6, 2021. Attachment 1 at page 6.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Published/G000/M428/K821/428821668.PDF
Vehicle Grid Integration Council Page 6 of 8
www.vgicouncil.org

September 30, 2022
but not necessarily SB, due to the 5-year grace period extended to V2X DC to meet applicable
standards.89 To remain consistent with the CPUC’s findings regarding the applicability of UL 1741
SB to bidirectional charging equipment, VGIC believes that the defining eligibility requirement
for the bidirectional charger rebate should instead be based on whether a bidirectional charger can
seek interconnection with a utility for its intended use case. This approach recognizes the CPUC’s
authority over the interconnection process and works to reference the existing interconnection
requirements. As such, VGIC strongly urges the CEC to remove the proposed UL 1741 SB
requirement and instead provide funding to sites that meet the relevant interconnection rule for
that distribution utility, which may or may not require certification to UL 1741 SB.
F. ELRP Capability Requirement
During the workshop, CEC staff detailed the proposed requirement that eligible equipment
must be “capable of responding to ELRP events.” 10 VGIC questions this requirement, given that
any individual site with a charger connected to the grid is “capable of responding” to an ELRP
event and may do so if enrolled in an ELRP Group A.5 Aggregation. ELRP does not impose
specific technology or minimum size requirements on individual sites. ELRP does require that
aggregations be capable of providing 25 kW of incremental load reduction (“ILR”) for at least one
hour. Still, this requirement applies to the entire aggregation rather than individual sites.
Moreover, VGIC advises against requiring sites to participate in ELRP, specifically. Notably,
PG&E’s commercial dynamic export compensation mechanism, expected to be adopted on
October 20th and offered in Q4 2023, prohibits participation in ELRP but provides significant
opportunities for V2G grid support.11 Additionally, more export compensation options may be
made available through new rates, programs, or direct wholesale market integration, and V2G
school buses should be able to switch to another option once it is available in the future. With this
8 Resolution E-5165. Approval, with Modifications, of Vehicle-to-Grid Implementation Plans and Technical
Requirements in Compliance with Decision 20-09-035. Page 6.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Published/G000/M420/K860/420860657.PDF
9 Resolution E-5165. Approval, with Modifications, of Vehicle-to-Grid Implementation Plans and Technical
Requirements in Compliance with Decision 20-09-035.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Published/G000/M420/K860/420860657.PDF
10 Funding Concept Slide 15.
11 Proposed Decision Adopting Settlement on Export Compensation for Certain Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Customers. September 14, 2022. http://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/SearchRes.aspx?DocFormat=ALL&DocID=496924142
Vehicle Grid Integration Council Page 7 of 8
www.vgicouncil.org

September 30, 2022
in mind, VGIC recommends that the CEC not require that sites enroll in ELRP specifically, but
rather that sites must enroll in either an existing or anticipated export compensation rate or
program. The CEC should also specify that sites may switch to another export compensation rate
or program in the future. Alternatively, the CEC should consider allowing sites to submit an
attestation confirming they will enroll in an export rate or program within the next three years and,
in the interim, will use the device for V2B discharging to manage their utility bill or provide backup
power. This ensures that deployed V2X chargers are ultimately used to support the grid while
recognizing that there are limited near-term V2G export options.
G. Co-Located and Integrated Renewable Generation and other Distributed Energy
Resources
VGIC supports the proposed provision that the procurement and installation of renewable
generation and other distributed energy resources be deemed eligible under this funding concept.
Stationary energy storage integrated or co-located with EVSE can, in many cases, facilitate a lower
cost and faster installation of EVSE. For example, integrated or co-located storage can allow new
EVSE to be placed on an existing service and avoid or defer transformer upgrades. In the case of
V2G EVSE, the benefits of integrated or co-located storage may be particularly high when on-site
renewable generation is also present, as both the EV and stationary storage can self-consume the
renewable generation and then export significant amounts of energy to meet local or system needs
during peak hours.
III. Conclusion
VGIC appreciates the leadership of the CEC in hosting the September 13th workshop and
developing the funding concept. We look forward to further collaboration with the CEC and other
stakeholders on this critical initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
ED BURGESS
Vehicle Grid Integration Council Page 8 of 8
www.vgicouncil.org