BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to
Continue the Development of Rates Rulemaking 18-12-006
and Infrastructure for Vehicle (Filed December 13, 2018)
Electrification.
REPLY COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION
COUNCIL ON THE PROPOSED DECISION ON TRANSPORTATION
ELECTRIFICATION POLICY AND INVESTMENT
Edward Burgess
Senior Policy Director
Zach Woogen
Policy Manager
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
10265 Rockingham Dr., Suite #100-4061
Sacramento, California 95827
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
November 8, 2022

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to
Continue the Development of Rates Rulemaking 18-12-006
and Infrastructure for Vehicle (Filed December 13, 2018)
Electrification.
REPLY COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION
COUNCIL ON THE PROPOSED DECISION ON TRANSPORTATION
ELECTRIFICATION POLICY AND INVESTMENT
In accordance with the California Public Utilities Commission Rules of Practice and Procedure,
the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) hereby submits reply comments on the Proposed
Decision on Transportation Electrification Policy and Investment, issued on October 14, 2022.
I. REPLY TO COMMENTS ON VGI STRATEGY AND FORUM.
A diverse set of stakeholders, including AAI, ATE, Center for Community Action and
Environmental Justice, East Yard Communities for Environmental Justice, Sierra Club, and UCS
(collectively, “Joint Commenters”), EDF, and WeaveGrid support the inclusion of a VGI strategy
but generally agree that the Commission must be more specific in setting a VGI strategy and
effective goals.1 Notably, ATE opposes the PD yet supports moving forward with a VGI strategy
and forum. Similarly, while VGIC does not necessarily support PG&E’s overarching
recommendation to reject the PD, we do agree with their assessment that “the PD does not provide
a clear strategy for how the Commission will endeavor to ensure ratepayer-funded incentives are
1 See, Opening Comments of AAI on PD at 5. Opening Comments of ATE on PD at 2 and 5. Opening Comments of
Joint Commenters at 7. Opening Comments of EDF on PD at 9. Opening Comments of WeaveGrid on PD at 4.
1

supporting reducing grid costs, fully utilizing renewable energy, and enhancing reliability.”2 In
considering specific revisions to the PD, VGIC strongly supports EDF’s recommendation for the
Commission to establish specific VGI Goals. This aligns with VGIC’s comments on the Draft TEF
as well as our opening comments on this PD, where we offer not only authoritative literature
supporting a Goals-Outcomes-Metrics policy framework, but also offer an example of its
implementation in a state facing grid challenges not entirely dissimilar to California’s (i.e., Hawaii)
and example VGI Goals, Outcomes, and Metrics for California.3
II. REPLY TO COMMENTS ON EV SUPPLY EQUIPMENT.
A. Bidirectional charging. As noted in our Opening Comments, VGIC strongly recommends
the Commission direct bidirectional charger capability to be considered in guidance on FC1
rebates, such that bidirectional chargers are not only eligible for rebates, but also receive an
appropriate level of rebate commensurate with their grid and customer benefits. Meanwhile, in
Opening Comments, the Joint Commenters recommend that bidirectional charging be explicitly
considered as a strategic focus area for the VGI Strategy and VGI Forum.4 In addition to VGIC’s
proposed revision to the PD’s guidance for FC1 rebate development, VGIC also strongly supports
the Joint Commentor’s proposed revision to the PD, including the redline revisions proposed by
Joint Commenters to PD pages 162-163 and 165 and Ordering Paragraph 11. Both PD revisions
are critical to ensuring VGI is maximized, as the VGI Forum will be established before FC1
commences, so VGIC’s proposed revisions to the program guidelines would only impact post-
2025 deployments. It is critical that bidirectional charging support be provided before FC1
2 Opening Comments of PG&E on PD at 8-9.
3 See Opening Comments of EDF on PD at 10. Opening Comments of VGIC at 4. Comments of VGIC on Draft TEF
Sections 3.4 and 11.3 at 3-10.
4 Opening Comments of Joint Commentors at 7.
2

commences in 2025, as the grid and customer benefits of doing so are clear and well-established
throughout this proceeding and a clear policy imperative under SB 676.
B. Data sharing requirement. In opening comments, VGIC, Chargepoint, Electrify America, and
EVgo note that the PD does not provide ample justification for the data sharing requirements.5
Specifically, VGIC supports EVgo’s recommendation that additional stakeholder process be held
to determine what data reporting requirements are necessary. We reiterate that imposing
unsubstantiated and ambiguous data sharing requirements is unreasonable at this time.
III. REPLY TO COMMENTS ON AUTOMATED LOAD MANAGEMENT.
A. Definition of ALM. Opening comments from EDF, EDF Renewables, EV Association,
Freewire, Siemens, The Mobility House (“TMH”), and WeaveGrid reflect an overwhelming
consensus that ALM solutions can save time and money for customers.6 Notably, EDF asserts that
“the Commission should require the utilities to use sophisticated VGI to mitigate the buildout need
to the maximum extent possible, and establish incentives that reward successful mitigation and
penalize avoidable overbuilding.”7 Moreover, VGIC agrees with TMH that “the Commission
should make room in its definition of the technology to encompass a variety of use cases and
configurations to avoid limiting the applications and opportnuities innovative companies can offer
customers,”8 and specifically supports the expansion of the definition to include customer-side
upgrade deferral. VGIC retains its opening comment’s recommendation for a robust stakeholder
5 See Opening Comments of ChargePoint at 10. Opening Comments of Electrify America at 2. Opening Comments
of EVgo at 6.
6 See, Opening Comments of EDF on PD at 9. Opening Comments of EDF Renewables on PD at 4. Opening
Comments of EVA at 5. Opening Comments of FreeWire at 2. Opening Comments of Siemens at 1. Opening
Comments of TMH at 3. Opening Comments of WeaveGrid at 6.
7 Opening Comments of EDF on PD at 9.
8 Opening Comments of TMH at 3.
3

process to revise the definition, as has been done in the past with this nuanced topic. However, as
an alternative, VGIC would support the adoption of EDF Renewables’ proposed revisions to the
ALM definition, which would insert “customer and/or” before “utility side of the meter.”
B. ALM Study and Rebate. In Opening Comments, EDF Renewables recommends more granular
ICA maps as a tool to promote ALM that is specifically intended to defer or avoid utility-side
upgrades. VGIC supports this in theory, but questions whether accurate, granular, and easily
accessible ICA data may be available in the near term, as indicated by ongoing efforts in the IDER
and High DER proceedings. Ideally, ICA maps will provide data needed to determine the level of
distribution system savings attributed to each site, and then use that data to determine the
appropriate cost share for ratepayers (via distribution cost savings), site hosts (via ALM incentive),
and the utility (via TMH’s proposed earnings adjustment mechanism or similar approach).
However, while accurate, granular, and accessible ICA maps are being developed, VGIC
recommends an interim ALM incentive approach derived from average system-wide costs of
utility-side TE distribution upgrades found in the EV Load and Research Report. While at an
individual level, this may result in ALM incentives where ALM election did not directly defer or
avoid utility-side infrastructure, on a programmatic scale this will ultimately lead to more
distribution deferral and avoidance. Notably, this reasoning underscores the ongoing Partnership
Pilot to promote DER non-wires alternatives for larger, primary grid upgrades. On a programmatic
scale, this approach was deemed to help avoid or defer distribution upgrades such that the benefits
outweighs the costs. The key question in that proceeding, as will be the case in designing an ALM
incentive, is how exactly to design the ALM incentive such that the benefits do, in fact, outweigh
the costs. With this in mind, VGIC supports Siemens’ assertion that an ALM study should
4

recommend how rebates will be calculated and agrees with TMH that the ALM study, as proposed,
“lacks urgency.”
C. Energization timelines. VGIC agrees with EVgo and Tesla that energization timelines should
be addressed. These parties recommend a separate forum be hosted to develop solutions to
streamline energization. VGIC does not oppose a separate forum but offers that this issue could be
scoped into the VGI forum, and, in turn, the forum could be expanded (e.g., from a two-day forum
to a three-day forum) to account for the added scope. VGIC believes it may be reasonable to link
the two discussions as some solutions to the energization timeline challenge can be found in VGI
strategies (i.e., ALM).
IV. REPLY TO COMMENTS ON WORKPLACE CHARGING.
VGIC strongly supports recommendations from GPI, EDF Renewables, and ChargePoint to
include funding for workplace charging in FC1. We are specifically compelled by ChargePoint’s
statement that “access to workplace charging has been found to increase the likelihood of an
employee choosing to drive electric sixfold.”9
V. CONCLUSION.
Respectfully submitted,
Edward Burgess
November 8, 2022
9 Opening Comments of ChargePoint on PD at 7.
5