Comments of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC) on the California Energy
Commission (CEC) Vehicle-Grid Integration Market Status and Funding Concepts
Workshop
Docket # 19-AB-2127
Implementation of AB 2127 Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Assessments
Ed Burgess
Senior Policy Director
Zach Woogen
Policy Manager
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
10265 Rockingham Dr.
Suite #100-4061
Sacramento, California 95827
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
Filed: August 12, 2022
Comments submitted via:
https://efiling.energy.ca.gov/Ecomment/Ecomment.aspx?docketnumber=19-AB-2127

August 12, 2022
I. Introduction
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) 1, a 501(c)6 membership-based advocacy
group, is pleased to provide comments in response to the California Energy Commission (“CEC”)
Workshop on Vehicle-Grid Integration Market Status and Funding Concepts hosted on July 28,
2022.
VGIC is committed to advancing the role of electric vehicles (“EVs”) and vehicle-grid
integration (“VGI”) through policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC
supports the transition to decarbonized transportation and electric sectors by ensuring the value
from EV deployments and flexible EV charging and discharging is recognized and compensated
to achieve a more reliable, affordable, and efficient electric grid.
II. The CEC should host annual VGI market status updates.
During the workshop, CEC staff, California Public Utilities Commission (“CPUC”) Energy
Division staff, and representatives from industry and utilities identified vital policy and market
developments for VGI solutions. Notably, the term “VGI” encompasses a wide array of strategies,
including dynamic rates, direct and indirect managed charging programs, automated load
management (“ALM”) and EV energy management systems, bidirectional charging
interconnection, standards, programs, and rate design, and EV supply equipment (“EVSE”)
integrated with co-located or integrated distributed energy resources (“DERs”). Meanwhile, the
development of the VGI market to support California’s decarbonization goals hinges on actions
taken by the CEC, CPUC, California Air Resources Board, California Building Standards
Commission, investor-owned utilities (“IOU”), publicly-owned utilities, community choice
aggregators, standards developments organizations, national laboratories and research institutions,
testing laboratories, private companies, environmental justice groups, community-based
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., dcbel, Enel X North America,
Inc., ENGIE NA, Fermata Energy, FlexCharging, FLO EV Charging, Ford Motor Company, FreeWire
Technologies, Inc., General Motors Company, Kaluza, Nissan Group of North America, Nuvve Holding
Corporation, Sacramento Municipal Utility District, Stellantis N.V., Sunrun, Switch EV Ltd, The Mobility House,
Toyota Motor North America, Inc., Veloce Energy, Inc., Wallbox USA Inc., and WeaveGrid. The views expressed
in these Comments are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all individual VGIC
member companies or supporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/)
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council Page 2 of 11
www.vgicouncil.org

August 12, 2022
organizations, ratepayer advocates, customer groups, and more. Given the complex landscape of
issues and relevant parties, VGIC believes the CEC should host an annual VGI market status
update workshop to provide a “health check-up” on progress toward SB 676, discuss remaining
roadblocks, and consider strategies to alleviate barriers to market development. VGIC believes
annual workshops can also support the development of an update to the 2014 VGI Roadmap,
should the CEC intend to lead or support such an effort in the future.
Regular VGI market status update workshops should feature stakeholders with differing
perspectives and highlight funding opportunities, dynamic rate options, and critical challenges and
opportunities for VGI, just as was done during the July 28th workshop. As noted during the
workshop, dynamic rates are an effective approach to enable VGI and were adopted in the
December 2020 VGI Strategies Decision (CPUC D.20-12-029) as a VGI strategy according to SB
676. However, VGIC recommends future VGI market status updates focus on and direct reference
programmatic VGI approaches – in addition to rates – that have also demonstrated success for
customers and market actors over the past few years. For example, Pacific Gas & Electric’s
(“PG&E”) VGI Pilots, which pilot program design rather than technology, the Emergency Load
Reduction Program (“ELRP”) EV/VGI Aggregator Pathway, Low Carbon Fuel Standard
(“LCFS”) holdback-funded Resilient Charging Pilot, and demand response (“DR”) options that
EVs may qualify for all represent proven or promising programmatic approaches to VGI. VGIC
believes there is a significant education gap related to DR participation options for EVs, which
was highlighted during the March 9, 2021 “EVs in DR” workshop and the May 10, 2021 workshop
report.2
Additionally, VGIC notes the July 28th workshop did not prominently feature ALM solutions
and options, which were adopted in the December 2020 VGI Strategies Decision as a near-term
VGI priority. This is not unique to this workshop, as the requirement that IOUs implement ALM
in EV programs, rules, and tariffs has been largely ignored (except for PG&E’s proposed EV
Charge 2 program) to date.3 Yet, ALM can accelerate EVSE deployment, reduce customer and
2 EVs and DR: VGI-DR Workshop Report. May 10, 2021.
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5dcde7af8ed96b403d8aeb70/t/60a452d8c996a914d3c60f1d/1621381853
358/VGI+DR+Workshop+Report.pdf
3 See Comments of VGIC on Revised TEF at pg 10 and Reply Comments of VGIC on Revised TEF at pg 6 and pg 8
footnote 17 for background on ALM implementation in CA:
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council Page 3 of 11
www.vgicouncil.org

August 12, 2022
system costs, and support other VGI use cases and desired policy objectives like demand
management and increased EVSE uptime. With this in mind, VGIC urges the CEC to host annual
market status updates that build on the July 28th workshop by additionally including programmatic
VGI options and ALM as focus areas.
III. Recommended enhancements to VGI funding concepts.
VGIC greatly appreciates the CEC staff’s focus and thoughtful development of VGI funding
concepts presented during the July 28th workshop. VGIC generally supports the four funding
concepts but recommends targeted modifications and enhancements to address critical gaps in the
VGI market, detailed below.
A. Bidirectional Charger Equipment Rebate and Make-Ready Support
VGIC supports the CEC staff’s proposed Bidirectional Charger Equipment Rebate funding
concept. Bidirectional charging equipment unlocks:
 Customer and community resilience by providing clean, low-cost backup power
solutions
 Customer bill management opportunities by discharging from a vehicle to meet site
load, performing energy arbitrage or demand charge management
 Revenue generation for customers and support for grid reliability and renewable energy
integration through vehicle-to-grid (“V2G”) exports. Customers can currently
participate in the ELRP EV/VGI Aggregation pathway and PG&E’s V2G Pilots.
Additionally, VGIC is hopeful that PG&E’s pending Day-Ahead Hourly Real Time
Pricing (“DAHRTP”) V2G export compensation mechanism settlement will be
approved by the CPUC, which would provide a compelling year-round V2G export
opportunity for commercial customers as early as October 2023.4 Lastly, SDG&E’s
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M471/K485/471485566.PDF and
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M477/K591/477591920.PDF
4 Joint Motion of Public Advocates Office, VGIC, Electrify America, and PG&E for Adoption of Joint Settlement
Agreement in PG&E’s DAHRTP Commercial EV Proceeding on Non-NEM Export Compensation Pilot. June 17, 2022.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M488/K538/488538216.PDF
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council Page 4 of 11
www.vgicouncil.org

August 12, 2022
anticipated Real-Time Pricing Import/Export Rate5 and the CPUC staff’s proposed
CalFUSE concept6 may provide additional future opportunities for export
compensation.
Despite the customer and grid benefits of bidirectional charging, deployment numbers and product
offerings remain relatively nascent and the incremental costs of installing bidirectional chargers
instead of unidirectional charging remain high – prohibitive in many cases. The CEC’s proposed
Bidirectional Charging Equipment Rebate will provide much-needed support to reduce the costs
of purchasing and installing bidirectional chargers and associated electrical equipment, including
traditional make-ready infrastructure and automatic transfer switches for backup power use cases.
Notably, bidirectional charging equipment is not currently given incrementally higher funding
under CEC rebates or make-ready programs. Although a type of energy storage, bidirectional
charging equipment is not deemed eligible for California’s Self-Generation Incentive Program.
There exists an uneven level of access to funding for bidirectional charging equipment compared
to other charging equipment and other energy storage systems.
As proposed, the Bidirectional Charger Rebate could be open to recipients of CALeVIP,
EnergIIZE, and, potentially, utility make-ready programs. VGIC urges the CEC to think
expansively about and take bold action regarding (1) the level of funding offered and (2) charger
eligibility for a bidirectional adder under these programs. Today’s commercially available
bidirectional charger equipment are V2X Direct Current (“DC”) configurations, and many V2X
DC sites, including school bus V2X sites that provide immense value to the grid and customers,
need to upgrade to 3-phase, higher voltage DC service. These upgrades result in higher costs than
what is typically covered by utility make-ready programs, which are intended to support Level 2
Alternating Current (“AC”) charging. Without sufficient funding support for these projects,
5 Administrative Law Judge’s Ruling Regarding Staff Recommendations and Workshop and Attachment A: Staff
Recommendations. June 15, 2022.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M485/K625/485625918.PDF and
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M485/K564/485564404.PDF
6 Advanced Strategies for Demand Flexibility Management and Customer DER Compensation. June 22, 2022.
https://www.cpuc.ca.gov/-/media/cpuc-website/divisions/energy-division/documents/demand-
response/demand-response-workshops/advanced-der---demand-flexibility-management/ed-white-paper---
advanced-strategies-for-demand-flexibility-management.pdf
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council Page 5 of 11
www.vgicouncil.org

August 12, 2022
customers will be unable to offset high upfront installation costs and may terminate otherwise
beneficial projects.
Additionally, not all available bidirectional chargers – of which there is only a handful on
the market – currently qualify for CEC rebate and utility make-ready programs. The Nissan LEAF
is the most common bidirectional charging vehicle, with approximately 25,000 currently on
California’s roads, and uses the CHAdeMO standard for bidirectional charging.7 Meanwhile,
CALeVIP,8 EnergIIZE,9 utility make-ready programs,10 and National Electric Vehicle
Infrastructure (“NEVI”) program administrators have decided to end support for CHAdeMO
connectors.11 VGIC expects all chargers, including bidirectional chargers, will converge on
common connector types and communication standards in the long term. However, we believe that
interim or temporary support for CHAdeMO standards is appropriate in recognition of the ability
for bidirectional charging to meet the unique reliability challenges California faces over the next
several years due to potential capacity shortfalls and extreme weather events. VGIC estimates that
California’s 25,000 Nissan LEAFs equate to 469 MW in total technical potential for incremental
contributions to net peak load. Not all vehicles will be able to participate at once, however, VGIC
estimates that a 5% participation rate would equate to approximately a 23 MW of potential net
peak contribution from today’s Nissan LEAFs.12
Meanwhile, V2X AC configurations can be piloted in California but do not need to comply
with certain Rule 21 interconnection requirements for smart inverter standards. Instead, the major
7 See VGIC’s estimates for bidirectional vehicle deployment in September 1, 2021 Opening Testimony in R.20-11-
003. Pg 4-10.
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5dcde7af8ed96b403d8aeb70/t/6137a2f643f8bc74a42af9ae/16310361511
86/2021-09-01+VGIC%27s+Opening+Testimony+on+Phase+2+Emergency+Reliability+Proposals+-+FINAL.pdf
8 Recommendation for Deployment of ISO 15118-Ready Chargers. California Energy Commission. February 24,2022.
9 Implementation Manual for Energy Infrastructure Incentives for Zero-Emission Commercial Vehicles Projects
(EnergIIZE). August 2, 2022. Pg 21.
https://energiize.org/implementationmanual/EnergIIZE_Implementation+Manual_+Q3+2022+vFinal.pdf
10 Decision Adopting Plug-In Electric Vehicle Submetering Protocol and Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment
Communication Protocols. August 4, 2022. Pg 44.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Published/G000/M496/K419/496419890.PDF
11 Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, National Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Formula Program. Federal Highway
Administration. Pg 37263. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2022-06-22/pdf/2022-12704.pdf
12 See VGIC’s estimates for bidirectional vehicle capabilities to support peak contributions September 1, 2021
Opening Testimony in R.20-11-
003. Pg 6.
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5dcde7af8ed96b403d8aeb70/t/6137a2f643f8bc74a42af9ae/16310361511
86/2021-09-01+VGIC%27s+Opening+Testimony+on+Phase+2+Emergency+Reliability+Proposals+-+FINAL.pdf
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council Page 6 of 11
www.vgicouncil.org

August 12, 2022
investor-owned utilities have adopted a requirement that costly relay equipment be installed to
ensure safety and reliability.13 The necessary relay equipment to run a V2X AC pilot is
prohibitively expensive and not a long-term solution. Standards development work is underway at
the relevant standards development organization, including UL, and is supported by utilities and
automotive stakeholders alike. The completion and implementation of these standards will unlock
lower-cost approaches to V2X AC. However, VGIC recognizes that this standards development
work is not yet completed and anticipates some delay between the publication of relevant standards
and final incorporation into Rule 21 processes. With this in mind, VGIC recommends the CEC’s
proposed bidirectional charging equipment adder be open to V2X AC pilot projects and provide
sufficient funding levels to offset costs installation costs, including safety relay equipment and trip
schemes.
Therefore, the CEC’s proposed bidirectional charger rebate could best support the nascent
bidirectional charging market by ensuring a sufficiently high level of funding support is offered to
all bidirectional chargers, regardless of what level of funding, if any, they are eligible to receive
from CEC rebate and make-ready programs. VGIC offers that the defining eligibility requirement
for the bidirectional charger rebate could be based on whether a bidirectional EVSE can seek
interconnection with a utility. In the case of V2X DC sites interconnecting to participate in the
investor-owned utility’s Emergency Load Reduction Programs, EVSE would need to be certified
to UL 1741, but not UL 1741 SA, SB, or any updated smart inverter standards established by the
Smart Inverter Working Group. V2X DC sites interconnecting with investor-owned utilities for
purposes other than ELRP would need to have EVSE certified to UL 1741 SA, but not SB, due to
the 5-year grace period extended to V2X DC EVSE to meet applicable standards. Lastly, V2X AC
sites do not need to meet certain Rule 21 interconnection requirements if seeking interconnection
as a pilot project, as detailed in CPUC Resolution E-5165. VGIC recommends the CEC revisit
these eligibility requirements once the V2X market is sufficiently developed and it is appropriate
to impose similar connector and communication standard requirements to what is required under
CEC rebate and utility make-ready programs.
13 Resolution E-5165. Approval, with Modifications, of Vehicle-to-Grid Implementation Plans and Technical
Requirements in Compliance with Decision 20-09-035.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Published/G000/M420/K860/420860657.PDF
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council Page 7 of 11
www.vgicouncil.org

August 12, 2022
B. Automated Load Management (“ALM”) Incentives
As noted above in Section II, ALM solutions were deemed a near-term policy action in
recognition that ALM is an important tool for meeting California’s TE goals. Encouraging
customers to voluntarily choose ALM solutions can be a powerful tool for both streamlining and
minimizing the total costs of TE. However, to date, ALM has not been promoted or implemented
by California’s utilities in their TE programs or any other pathway, apart from PG&E’s EV Charge
Network and the proposed PG&E EV Charge 2. ALM strategies can reduce energization timelines
and associated costs by deferring or even completely avoiding the need for certain distribution
utility infrastructure upgrades and other make-ready work. ALM solutions include:
 Software-based approaches that share available electrical capacity among EVSE: Sites
with multiple EVSE and long dwell times, including workplace charging sites and multi-
unit dwellings, are particularly well suited for software-based ALM. Software-based ALM
is used to draw less total power than the aggregate nameplate charging rate at a site. For
example, a site with a combined 76 kW maximum charger demand could use software to
ensure the actual demand does not exceed 62 kW.
 Battery-integrated EVSE or co-located energy storage systems sized to avoid or defer the
need for additional electrical capacity and infrastructure on both the utility and customer
side of the meter: Sites with short dwell times, including public DCFC stations and certain
fleet charging depots, are particularly well suited to implement integrated or co-located
energy storage as an ALM solution. Batteries can be integrated into a charging station or
external to a charging station but co-located behind the same meter. These batteries charge
from the grid when EVSE utilization and energy costs are low and discharge to meet EVSE
load when utilization and energy costs are high. For example, using existing battery-
integrated EVSE or co-located energy storage technologies, a site with less than 30 kW of
available power could deliver a 200 kW charge to a single vehicle. Said another way, a site
with a 200 kW EV charging demand can inherently ensure demand will not exceed 30 kW.
For some EVSE site hosts, ALM solutions can facilitate the interim use of EVSE at a lower power
until any needed distribution utility and on-site infrastructure upgrades are completed, at which
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council Page 8 of 11
www.vgicouncil.org

August 12, 2022
point they can operate at full power. For others, ALM solutions can defer or avoid the need for
distribution utility or on-site infrastructure upgrades altogether. In these cases, site hosts
experience reduced time to connect/energize their EVSE and contribute to infrastructure cost
savings which accrue to site hosts, drivers, and utility ratepayers at large. Additionally, ALM
solutions can support other desirable use cases, including managing charging load during peak
electricity demand, lowering demand charges for the site host, enabling EV charging when the
grid goes down, providing backup power to the site host to enhance resilience, or providing power
to the site and ancillary services to the grid. The set of these co-benefits available to a given site
will depend on whether software-based ALM or integrated/co-located energy storage – or both –
strategies are implemented.
Utility make-ready programs do not send the proper price signals to the market and, to
VGIC’s knowledge, the CEC-funded rebate programs like CALeVIP and EnergIIZE do not
actively promote ALM solutions. Collectively, these programs inadvertently undermine any
justification for customers to elect ALM solutions that right-size infrastructure and accelerate
deployment. As such, VGIC recommends the CEC consider a funding concept to promote ALM.
VGIC believes the following design elements are key to successful ALM implementation:
 Ensuring ALM is an option for customers to choose from and not a requirement.
 Conducting marketing, education, and outreach to inform utilities and customers of
available ALM solutions and the benefits associated with each.
 Offering incentives to site hosts that elect ALM, including:
1) A $/kW rebate for reducing distribution utility infrastructure upgrades, applied to
each kW reduced below aggregate nameplate charger capacity at a site. Notably,
total to-the-meter make-ready cost data for non-TE program installations are
published in the EV Load Research Report, and total kW deployed in non-TE
program installations is tracked in the same report.14 This data can be used to find
the average $/kW value of ALM and, in turn, can provide the basis for a $/kW
14 Joint IOU Electric Vehicle Load Research and Charging Infrastructure Cost Report: 10th Report Filed on March 21,
2022. Pg 120, Attachment 1 Table 2; Attachment 2 Table 2; Attachment 3 Table 2.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M464/K783/464783120.PDF
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council Page 9 of 11
www.vgicouncil.org

August 12, 2022
incentive applied to each kW an ALM approach reduces below aggregate
nameplate capacity at a site.
2) A fixed incentive for installing EVSE behind existing utility meters. The value of
this incentive should also be commensurate with the average cost of installing a
new meter.
VGIC recognizes that technical standards are being developed that may streamline the deployment
of ALM software.15 Additionally, VGIC has recommended to the CPUC that the above ALM
incentive approaches be included in Funding Cycle 1 (2025-2030) of the proposed Statewide
Behind-the-Meter Rebate Program.16 However, these developments may not be realized for several
years. In the interim, VGIC recommends the CEC consider a new, separate “ALM Incentives”
funding concept based on the two types of incentives highlighted above.
C. Support for Meter Socket Based Solutions and Electrical Isolation Methods
In January 2021, the CPUC issued a Decision directing utilities to develop pathways to
evaluate and approve low-cost, reliable electrical isolation methods.17 These isolation methods can
support vehicle-to-home (“V2H”) and vehicle-to-building (“V2B”) backup power solutions for
customers where an automatic transfer switch is too costly, not possible given physical constraints,
or simply not the preferred configuration. Although the CPUC has directed the utilities to develop
pathways to approve such low-cost isolation methods, solutions that rely on a meter socket form
factor do not qualify for CEC rebates or utility make-ready programs intended to support EVSE.
For example, the IslandDER18 and Tesla Backup Switch19 are both low-cost isolation solutions
15 See, for example, IEEE 2030.13 committee.
16 See Comments of VGIC on Revised TEF at pg 10 and Reply Comments of VGIC on Revised TEF at pg 6 and pg 8
footnote 17 for recommendations to implement ALM in CA under the proposed BTM Rebate Program:
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M471/K485/471485566.PDF and
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M477/K591/477591920.PDF
17 Decision Adopting Rates, Tariffs, and Rules Facilitating the Commercialization of Microgrids Pursuant to Senate
Bill 1339 and Resiliency Strategies. January 14, 2021. Pg 70.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Published/G000/M361/K442/361442167.PDF
18 https://connca.com/products/islandder/
19 https://www.tesla.com/support/energy/powerwall/learn/tesla-backup-switch
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council Page 10 of 11
www.vgicouncil.org

August 12, 2022
that utilize meter socket devices and could enable low-cost V2H and V2B but do not qualify for
incentives.
With this in mind, VGIC urges the CEC to ensure meter socket-based solutions are deemed
eligible in current and planned CEC funding concepts to ensure a level playing field for customers
to access rebates for these solutions. Notably, Siemens and ConnectDER recently announced a
meter socket product that could facilitate VGI for customers that do not want to upgrade their
electrical panel. Including meter socket-based VGI technologies in existing and new rebate
programs would directly reduce customer costs and increase access to low-cost V2H/V2B backup
power solutions.
IV. Conclusion
VGIC appreciates the leadership of the CEC in hosting the VGI market status update workshop
and developing VGI funding concepts. We look forward to further collaboration with the CEC and
other stakeholders on this important initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
ED BURGESS
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council Page 11 of 11
www.vgicouncil.org