BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
FILED
08/15/22
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 22-07-005
03:47 PM
Advance Demand Flexibility (Filed July 14, 2022)
R2207005
Through Electric Rates.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE ORDER
INSTITUTING RULEMAKING TO ADVANCE DEMAND FLEXIBILITY THROUGH
ELECTRIC RATES
Edward Burgess
Senior Policy Director
Zach Woogen
Policy Manager
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
10265 Rockingham Dr.
Suite #100-4061
Sacramento, California 95827
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
August 15, 2022

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 22-07-005
Advance Demand Flexibility (Filed July 14, 2022)
Through Electric Rates.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE ORDER
INSTITUTING RULEMAKING TO ADVANCE DEMAND FLEXIBILITY THROUGH
ELECTRIC RATES
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) 1 hereby submits
these comments on the Order Instituting Rulemaking to Advance Demand Flexibility Through
Electric Rates (“OIR”), adopted by the Joint Commissioners on July 14, 2022.
I. INTRODUCTION.
VGIC commends the Commission for issuing the OIR and appreciates the attention given
to advancing demand flexibility, especially considering the growing integration of distributed
energy resources (“DERs”), including electric vehicles (“EVs”), into the electric system. VGIC is
excited to see the continuation of a conversation that began last year surrounding the universally
accessible, dynamic, and economic signal (“UNIDE”) framework presented by Commission Staff
at a workshop on May 25, 2021. Shaping DER dispatch and load generally through retail rates
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., dcbel, Enel X North
America, Inc., ENGIE NA, Fermata Energy, FlexCharging, FLO EV Charging, Ford Motor Company,
FreeWire Technologies, Inc., General Motors Company, Kaluza, Nissan Group of North America, Nuvve
Holding Corporation, Sacramento Municipal Utility District, Stellantis N.V., Sunrun, Switch EV Ltd, The
Mobility House, Toyota Motor North America, Inc., Veloce Energy, Inc., Wallbox USA Inc., and
WeaveGrid. The views expressed in these Comments are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the
views of all individual VGIC member companies or supporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/)
1

provides a path to incentivize these resources to beneficially serve the grid while also allowing for
costs to be recovered if load is shaped uneconomically. While other mechanisms, such as
wholesale market integration, can also help achieve these goals, barriers have been faced when
developing these other pathways. On the other hand, dynamic pricing rates have already been
deployed in California. They will soon be expanded, for example, through Pacific Gas & Electric’s
Day-Ahead Hourly Real-Time Pricing (“DAHRTP”) commercial EV rate.
In support of this OIR, Commission Staff released a whitepaper, “Advanced Strategies for
Demand Flexibility Management and Customer DER Compensation,” outlining a California
Flexible Unified Signal for Energy (“CalFUSE”) framework for future dynamic rates in the state
incorporating real-time pricing (“RTP”) for generation and distribution capacity, as well as
bidirectional electricity prices and hedging subscription and transactive products.
EVs are well-positioned to take advantage of dynamic pricing and load flexibility. Vehicle
Grid Integration (“VGI”) strategies, including managed charging and discharging, can unlock EVs
as a strategic grid asset with the right price signals. These price signals can directly inform
customer behavior or integrate with automated charge management systems for a “behind the
scenes” customer experience.
VGIC agrees with the Commission that “[t]he rapid growth of electric end uses – including
electric vehicle charging, distributed energy resources, and building decarbonization – presents
new challenges and opportunities for coordinating demand flexibility to meet system needs on a
regular basis.”2 To this end, VGIC offers these comments and recommendations to ensure holistic
2 OIR at 1-2.
2

consideration of California’s climate goals and continue near-term progress on enabling dynamic
rates and managed charging programs for EV customers.
II. BACKGROUND & INTEREST IN PROCEEDING.
VGIC is a 501(c)6 membership-based advocacy group committed to advancing the role of
EVs and VGI through policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the
transition to a decarbonized transportation and electric sector by ensuring the value from EV
deployments and flexible EV charging and discharging is recognized and compensated to achieve
a more reliable, affordable, and efficient electric grid. VGIC currently has 22 members, including
automotive original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”) and EV service providers (“EVSPs”),
and has a direct interest in shaping the policies, procedures, and rules needed to modernize the
electric grid for a high DER future. VGIC has been an active participant in related rulemakings
such as the Transportation Electrification or “DRIVE” (R.18-12-006), Self-Generation Incentive
Program (R.20-05-012), Microgrids and Resiliency (R.19-09-009), Streamlining Interconnection
of DERs (R.17-07-007), Emergency Summer Reliability (R.20-11-003), and High DER Future
(R.21-06-017) proceedings.
III. COMMENTS ON THE PROPOSED SCOPE.
In recognition of the anticipated growth of DERs, including VGI-capable EVs, VGIC
appreciates the magnitude of the challenge facing California’s electric grid. Previously, load was
seen as relatively inflexible demand that had to be met by supply; however, as multiple end-uses
become electrified, including transportation, shaping load in ways that are useful to the grid
becomes both more feasible and more critical to maintaining electric reliability and affordability.
To harness and shape this load, VGIC supports the Commission opening this proceeding to
consider how to advance demand flexibility.
3

A. Rate design principles should consider non-electric sector state goals, including
transportation sector emissions reductions.
VGIC generally supports the ambitious nature of this proceeding and believes that
considering rate design principles at this juncture is appropriate. The basic principles of
maintaining a reliable and affordable grid should remain. However, the Commission should
consider updating certain principles that do not meet the needs of today’s evolving grid,
including the following principle: “Rates should encourage the reduction of coincident and
non-coincident peak demand.”3 Specifically, increased non-coincident peak demand, for
example, from daytime EV charging load, does not necessarily increase costs or pose reliability
risks. Therefore, rates need not encourage reductions to non-coincident peak demand. As low-
cost renewable energy supply grows, increasing the non-coincident peak demand of an
individual customer through daytime EV charging can benefit the grid by absorbing excess
solar production, including self-consumption at a site with rooftop solar photovoltaic
generation.
To this end, VGIC urges the Commission to consider how rates can advance other goals
in the state of California, such as greenhouse gas (“GHG”), climate, and air pollution goals
that extend beyond the electric sector. The transportation sector is California's largest source
of GHG emissions, accounting for almost 40% of statewide emissions in 2019.4 To address
this, Governor Newsom’s Executive Order N79-20 targets 100% zero-emission vehicle
3 D.12-06-029 at 12.
4 California Air Resources Board. California Greenhouse Gas Emissions for 2000 to 2019: Trends of
Emissions and Other Indicators. Available at:
https://ww3.arb.ca.gov/cc/inventory/pubs/reports/2000_2019/ghg_inventory_trends_00-19.pdf
4

(“ZEV”) market share for in-state sales of new passenger cars and trucks by 2035 and 100%
ZEV medium- and heavy-duty vehicles by 2045.5
When considering California’s climate goals, it is appropriate for the Commission to
take a holistic view of emissions across the state and consider how rate design can promote
transportation electrification (“TE”) to yield lower transportation sector GHG emissions. The
Commission should therefore consider adding a rate design principle to directly encourage TE,
which supports affordability, reliability, and emissions reductions for both the electric and
transportation sectors.
B. If the Commission chooses to pursue a unified technology-agnostic rate, progress on
EV-specific rate offerings should not be delayed or prematurely ended.
California load-serving entities (“LSE”) have been incorporating aspects of the
proposed CalFUSE framework into EV-specific rates over the past several years. All three
investor-owned utilities (“IOUs”) offer residential and commercial EV-specific rates to
encourage beneficial EV charging behavior and recover appropriate costs of service.
Generally, these rates are high-differential time-of-use (“TOU”) rates that could be applied to
the entire customer account or a separately metered EV. The Commission’s recent
Submetering Decision (“D.”) 22-08-024 provides an alternative to separately metered and
whole-site TOU rates by utilizing the EVSE to measure charging load. EV-specific TOU rates,
whether separately metered, submetered, or whole-site, promote demand flexibility and
introduce customers to the concept of time-differentiated rates.
5 Executive Order N-79-20. Available at: https://www.gov.ca.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/9.23.20-
EO-N-79-20- Climate.pdf
5

In addition to the EV-specific TOU rates currently offered by each IOU, San Diego
Gas and Electric (“SDG&E”) is piloting an innovative VGI Rate option as part of its Power
Your Drive program. This rate includes a California Independent System Operator (“CAISO”)
wholesale market day-ahead energy price component with a day-of adjustment, a peak demand
adder, and a distribution circuit demand adder. The April 2021 Power Your Drive Research
Report shows that the VGI rate successfully aligns charging load with grid needs, “reducing
load when CAISO prices rise or system or circuit adders are applied.” 6 Additionally, Pacific
Gas and Electric (“PG&E”) plans to offer a dynamic day-ahead, hourly, real time price
(“DAHRTP”) rate option to all eligible commercial EV customers with a target launch date of
October 2023.7 Notably, this is not a capped or experimental rate pilot like SDG&E’s VGI
Rate or TeMix RATES Pilot mentioned in the CalFUSE whitepaper, but rather a full-scale
optional rate open to all eligible commercial customers. In June 2022, several parties in
PG&E’s DAHRTP application jointly filed a settlement agreement proposing an export
compensation mechanism for non-net energy metering (“NEM”) DAHRTP customers, which
could also be offered to customers as early as October 2023.8 The export compensation
mechanism, which provides a bidirectional price signal for marginal energy and marginal
generation capacity costs, is pending before the Commission. Lastly, Resolution E-5192
directs PG&E to file a Tier 2 Advice Letter by September 2, 2022, proposing a dynamic rate
6 Power Your Drive Research Report. SDG&E. April 2021. Pg 19.
https://www.sdge.com/sites/default/files/regulatory/SDG%26E%20FINAL%20Power%20Your%20Drive
%20Research%20Report%20April%202021.pdf
7 Decision Authorizing PG&E to Implement an Optional Day-Ahead Real Time Rate for Commercial EV
Customers. November 19, 2021.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Published/G000/M424/K557/424557371.PDF
8 Joint Motion of the Public Advocates Office, VGIC, Electrify America, and PG&E for Adoption of Joint
Settlement Agreement in PG&E’s DAHRTP Commercial EV Proceeding on Non-NEM Export
Compensation Pilot. June 17, 2022.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M488/K538/488538216.PDF
6

for its approved VGI pilots. The rate design requirements that PG&E must meet, detailed in
Section 10 of the Resolution, closely follow the CalFUSE framework, including bidirectional
pricing, dynamic marginal energy prices based on wholesale electricity costs, and dynamic
marginal capacity prices based on grid utilization. These developments, specifically PG&E’s
DAHRTP rate option, represent critical strategies to promote flexible EV charging demand
and by no means should be delayed, altered, or prematurely concluded.
The CalFUSE framework contemplates a unified, technology-agnostic rate to simplify
the menu of options and reduce complexity for customers. VGIC appreciates the underlying
intent of this approach and understands how it may unlock widespread demand flexibility in
California. However, if the Commission does decide to adopt a “one size fits all” solution,
VGIC strongly recommends the Commission use a phased approach that does not abruptly and
prematurely halt critical progress on the above-mentioned EV-specific rate approaches. At this
early stage of the market, technology-specific rates, including SDG&E’s PYD VGI rate,
PG&E’s planned DAHRTP rate, and PG&E’s upcoming dynamic rate design proposal
according to Resolution E-5192, remain appropriate and should be offered in the interim period
until - and perhaps even alongside – the phase-in of a potential universal CalFUSE rate.
C. The Commission should consider looking beyond a “one size fits all” solution and
instead consider a range of rate design and programmatic approaches.
The 2019-2020 VGI Working Group identified 320 unique VGI use cases, as different EV
customers and charging site hosts have different mobility needs, willingness and ability to
manage charging, and technological capabilities.9 A single solution may not be a good fit for
9 Final Report of the California Joint Agencies Vehicle-Grid Integration Working Group. June 30, 2020.
https://gridworks.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/VGI-Working-Group-Final-Report-6.30.20.pdf
7

all passenger EV drivers, fleets (e.g., electric school buses, last-mile delivery, etc.), and public
fast charging sites. Therefore, a flexible portfolio of rate design options and programmatic
managed charging approaches should be implemented to accommodate the vast array of
flexible EV charging use cases.
With this in mind, VGIC strongly recommends this proceeding not detract from
Commission efforts to progress programmatic EV demand flexibility strategies. While this
proceeding is focused on advancing demand flexibility through electric rates, VGIC believes
it is critical to continue offering non-rate options, including the Emergency Load Reduction
Program EV/VGI Aggregation Pathway, PG&E’s Low Carbon Fuel Standard-funded Resilient
Charging Pilot, SCE’s proposed Large-Scale Residential V1G Pilot, and SDG&E’s proposed
EV DR Pilot. In complement to EV-specific rates, these programmatic approaches represent
significant drivers for VGI market development and facilitate participation from the broadest
possible set of customers.
IV. CATEGORIZATION, HEARINGS, AND SCHEDULE.
VGIC supports the categorization and proposed schedule of this proceeding and agrees
with the preliminary determination finding the need for hearings.
V. NOTICES.
Services of all notices and communications in this proceeding should be directed to the
following VGIC representative:
Ed Burgess
Senior Policy Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
10265 Rockingham Dr.
Suite #100-4061
Sacramento, CA 95827
8

Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
VI. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit these comments on the OIR. We look forward
to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
Edward Burgess
Senior Policy Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: August 15, 2022
9