BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to
Continue the Development of Rates Rulemaking 18-12-006
and Infrastructure for Vehicle (Filed December 13, 2018)
Electrification.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON
THE PROPOSED DECISION ON TRANSPORTATION
ELECTRIFICATION POLICY AND INVESTMENT
Edward Burgess
Senior Policy Director
Zach Woogen
Policy Manager
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
10265 Rockingham Dr., Suite #100-4061
Sacramento, California 95827
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
November 3, 2022

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to
Continue the Development of Rates Rulemaking 18-12-006
and Infrastructure for Vehicle (Filed December 13, 2018)
Electrification.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON
THE PROPOSED DECISION ON TRANSPORTATION
ELECTRIFICATION POLICY AND INVESTMENT
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) 1 hereby submits
these comments on the Proposed Decision on Transportation Electrification Policy and
Investment, issued on October 14, 2022.
I. INTRODUCTION.
VGIC commends Energy Division (“ED”) staff’s diligent efforts in developing the
sweeping Proposed Decision (“PD”), including the establishment of the statewide Funding Cycle
1 (“FC1”) rebate program to facilitate transportation electrification (“TE”) infrastructure
deployment. While VGIC is encouraged by the Vehicle-Grid Integration (“VGI”) Strategy and
VGI Forum concepts that were absent from the TE Staff Proposal but added to the PD, we remain
concerned that several critical opportunities to maximize the use of feasible and cost-effective VGI
per Senate Bill (“SB”) 676 are being overlooked, including establishing a robust portfolio of utility
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., Customized Energy Solutions,
dcbel, Enel X North America, Inc., ENGIE NA, Fermata Energy, FlexCharging, FLO EV Charging, Ford Motor
Company, FreeWire Technologies, Inc., General Motors, Kaluza, Nissan Group of North America, Nuvve Holding
Corporation, Sacramento Municipal Utility District, Stellantis, Sunrun, Switch EV Ltd, The Mobility House, Toyota
Motor North America, Inc., Veloce Energy, Inc., Wallbox USA Inc., and WeaveGrid. The views expressed in these
Comments are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all individual VGIC member companies or
supporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/)
1

VGI programs and rate offerings. It has been over three years since SB 676 was signed into law
and nearly two full years since the Commission adopted the VGI Strategies Decision 20-12-029,
yet most of California’s 1 million electric vehicle (“EV”) drivers and fleets remain without access
to a mass-market VGI program, VGI rate, or incentive.2 Based on our understanding, the following
limited VGI offerings are currently available to customers, only one of which is not a pilot:
VGI Offering Offering Type Status
Emergency Load Reduction Emergency DR Program Pilot
Program EV/VGI Aggregation3
PG&E VGI Pilots4 Technology Incentive and Pilot
Rate
PG&E evPulse5 Telematics-based Managed Pilot
Charging
PG&E BMW ChargeForward, GM Non-Ratepayer Funded Pilot
V2X Pilot, Ford V2X Pilot6 Pilots
SCE RATES Pilot7 Rate Pilot
SDG&E V2G School Bus Pilot8 Infrastructure Funding Pilot
SDG&E Power Your Drive VGI Rate Limited to L2 charging at 200 Workplace and
Rate9 Multi-Unit Dwellings sites installed under
$43 million PYD make-ready program
Meanwhile, of the approved and forthcoming VGI offerings, only one is not a pilot: PG&E’s
Dynamic Commercial EV Charging Rate.10 Given the state’s ambitious EV deployment goals and
regulations, it is important that the Commission clarify how California will evolve from its existing
patchwork of VGI pilots to full-scale programs and optional rates that fully leverage flexible EV
2 While TOU rates promote off-peak charging, this is the baseline assumption used for California’s modeling efforts,
and VGIC believes implementing TOU rates alone would forego considerable opportunity for both load reduction
and exports.
3 https://www.cpuc.ca.gov/industries-and-topics/electrical-energy/electric-costs/demand-response-dr/emergency-
load-reduction-program
4 https://www.cpuc.ca.gov/news-and-updates/all-news/cpuc-supports-transportation-electrification-with-approval-
of-pge-vgi-pilots
5 https://www.pge.com/tariffs/assets/pdf/adviceletter/ELEC_6226-E.pdf
6 https://cleantechnica.com/2022/03/13/ford-gm-pge-to-begin-vehicle-to-grid-trials/
https://www.utilitydive.com/news/pge-bmw-smart-charging-pilot-highlights-potential-for-electric-vehicles-
a/600958/
7 https://www.dret-ca.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/SCE-AL-4684-E-Non-Standard-Disposition-letter.pdf
8 https://www.sdgenews.com/article/vehicle-grid-pilot-leveraging-big-batteries-electric-school-buses-support-grid
9 https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Published/G000/M378/K429/378429298.PDF
10 https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Published/G000/M424/K557/424557371.PDF
2

charging and discharging capabilities to contribute to California’s increasingly challenged grid.
VGIC respectfully requests that the Commission modify this PD to provide this clarity, building
upon the well-established record in this proceeding. Absent a concerted focus on VGI and a
cohesive portfolio of VGI offerings, the Final Decision would not only represent a missed
opportunity to unlock millions of EVs as grid resources whilst the grid continues to face reliability
challenges, but also fail to meet the goals and intent of both SB 676 and the VGI Strategies
Decision 20-12-029.
With this in mind, VGIC has identified several enhancements and modifications to the PD
that would better support California’s broader TE and climate goals, summarized below:
 The Commission should adopt a VGI strategy that sets specific targets and milestones
based on the record in this proceeding and the policy imperative established by SB 676.
 Tier 2 Advice Letters resulting from the Annual VGI Forum should be broadly applicable
to VGI topics, rather than being restricted to Funding Cycle 1 and other existing TE rebate
program modifications.
 The rebate guidelines should acknowledge the incremental capabilities of bidirectional
chargers and require varying rebate levels for bidirectional chargers based on power ratings
(e.g., higher incentive for a bidirectional charger relative to a unidirectional charger with
the same power rating).
 The PD should clarify that marketing, education, and outreach (“ME&O”) efforts may
include partnerships between the FC1 third-party administrator and automakers or EV
service providers.
 The PD should remove certain minimum EVSE data-sharing requirements that are not
based on clear justification and offer no explanation of how confidential data will be used.
 The PD overlooks the extensive argument in support of retaining D.20-12-029’s ALM
provisions and establishing an ALM incentive.
 The PD’s revised ALM definition should not be adopted, and stakeholders should be
convened to develop a consensus definition that fits within the vision of SB 676.
II. RECOMMENDED MODIFICATIONS TO THE PROPOSED VGI STRATEGY
AND FORUM
A. The Commission should adopt a VGI strategy that sets specific targets and milestones
based on the record in this proceeding and the policy imperative established by SB
676.
3

VGIC agrees with the PD’s assertion that “we find it appropriate to establish strategic focus
areas for VGI: (1) rates and demand flexibility programs; (2) technology enablement; and (3)
planning.”11 For the first strategic focus area, the PD refers to the Advancing Demand Flexibility
through Rates Rulemaking (“R.”) 22-07-055 as a dedicated venue to advance leadership on rates.
The PD describes that the second strategic focus area will be explored through the VGI Forum and
that “investor-owned utilities (“IOUs”) will have a significant role to play in the enablement of
VGI technology, including establishing interconnection standards and supporting the development
of performance requirements for VGI equipment.”12 Lastly, the PD explains that the third strategic
focus area is already underway as the Commission continues to coordinate with other state
agencies across “various proceedings and processes” to ensure VGI is adequately considered.
VGIC urges the Commission to adopt specific VGI targets and milestones to guide progress
and yield meaningful market development results within each of the three strategic focus areas.
Moreover, the Commission should consider formalizing the strategic focus areas through a “Goals-
Outcomes-Metrics” framework, as detailed in VGIC’s Comments on the Draft TE Framework.13
Per SB 676, the Goal is indisputably to “maximize the use of feasible and cost-effective VGI by
January 1, 2030.” The Outcome, in turn, should be to make VGI programs and rates available to
customers, and the appropriate Metric by which to measure progress toward this Outcome would
be to understand what percentage of customers are participating in a VGI program or rate. To
accomplish the Outcome, the Commission should set a Target of 100% of customers having
11 PD at 162.
12 PD at 162.
13 Comments of Vehicle-Grid Integration Council on the Transportation Electrification Framework (Sections 3.4
And 11.3). Pages 3-10.
4

access to an optional VGI program or rate by 202714 and should consider setting interim targets
along the way to track progress toward the outcome. Critically, this target should not be satisfied
simply by enrolling customers on TOU rates, which would fail to maximize VGI by leaving critical
load reduction and export opportunities untapped and unutilized. Adopting such a framework will
send a much-needed signal to the industry that California is prepared to evolve from the current
paradigm of seemingly endless pilots to a new era of mass-market programs and rate offerings that
meaningfully leverage flexible EV charging and discharging at scale.
B. Tier 2 Advice Letters resulting from the Annual VGI Forum should be broadly
applicable to VGI topics, rather than being restricted to Funding Cycle 1 and other
existing TE rebate program modifications.
VGIC strongly supports the establishment of an annual VGI Forum to gather the relevant
stakeholders to co-develop solutions to overcome critical VGI market development barriers. This
much-needed venue will provide a consistent opportunity for utilities, VGI solution providers
(including automakers and charging companies), customer groups, and other key stakeholders to
raise issues and share best practices from real-world deployment around the country. The PD states
that following each VGI Forum, “the IOUs shall propose any changes to the FC1 program based
on the VGI Forum’s discussion and the subsequent workshop reports through the Tier 2 Advice
Letter filing.”15 The PD also states that IOUs may file separate Tier 2 Advice Letters, where
appropriate, to propose any changes to other existing TE rebate programs. First, VGIC strongly
supports the inclusion of both FC1 and existing TE rebate programs changes in the Tier 2 Advice
Letter process. VGIC has flagged several critical deficiencies in existing TE rebate program design
within this proceeding that severely limit the VGI market, including:
14 SB 676 suggests a 2030 target, however VGIC believes it would be appropriate to set a more aggressive target to
better align with the more pressing grid reliability and EV deployment challenges that California faces.
15 PD at 165.
5

 Lack of incremental incentives for bidirectional charging equipment that is needed to
support grid reliability, including during extreme heat events.16
 Requirements that funded chargers be ISO 15118-capable, thereby excluding over
30,000 bidirectional-capable Nissan LEAF owners from receiving rebates and
providing exports to support the grid.17 Notably, this undermines the critical
technology neutrality provision of SB 676, PUC § 740.16(b)(2) which states “[VGI]
Strategies shall not require the use of any specific technology.”18
 Requiring all make-ready rebate recipients take service under a new meter and service
drop, which limits opportunities for bidirectional use cases (i.e., V2B customer bill
management and V2B backup power), extends the energization timeline, excludes
customers with physical constraints that cannot accommodate new meter or service,
and misses opportunities to deploy more chargers for each segment (e.g., L2, DCFC)
using a fixed amount of ratepayer funding.19 Although the Submetering Decision 22-
08-024 was a positive development and can be expected to yield increased EV rate
participation from co-mingled EV and site load, existing TE rebate programs remain
exclusive to separately-metered EVSE.
With this in mind, VGIC strongly supports the provision that IOUs may file a Tier 2 Advice Letter
to propose any changes to existing TE rebate programs in response to findings from each VGI
Forum. However, VGIC posits that barriers emerging from VGI Forum discussions will not be
limited to FC1 and existing TE rebate program design. For example, barriers to maximizing VGI
may relate to metering, interconnection, standards, rate design, program design (other than existing
TE rebate programs and FC1), marketing, education, and outreach, and other topic areas not
considered within the scope of existing TE rebate programs and FC1 but that could be materially
addressed through a targeted Tier 2 Advice Letter. Therefore, VGIC strongly recommends that
Tier 2 Advice Letters filed as a result of VGI Forum discussion and workshop reports be permitted
16 Comments of VGIC on Staff Proposal at 7-10.
17 Comments of VGIC PEV Submetering Proposed Decision at 10-11.
18 Public Utilities Code 740.16(b)(2)
19 Comments on Staff Proposal of AEE at 7, EDF Renewables at 4, SBUA at 16, VGIC at 10. Reply Comments on
Staff Proposal of VGIC at 6-10.
6

to apply to VGI-related policies, programs, rates, and rules broadly, rather than limiting
applicability to FC1 and existing TE rebate programs.
III. RECOMMENDED MODIFICATIONS TO THE PROPOSED FC1
ADMINISTRATION, INCLUDING REBATE DESIGN, MARKETING, AND
TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
A. The rebate guidelines should acknowledge the incremental capabilities of
bidirectional chargers and require varying rebate levels for bidirectional chargers
based on power ratings (e.g., higher incentive for a bidirectional charger relative to
a unidirectional charger with the same power rating)..
In Section 4.3.2.3, the PD establishes guidelines to apply in setting rebate levels, including
“vary rebate levels based on power capacity (i.e., Level 2 vs DCFC)” for both LD rebates and
MDHD rebates. The requirement that rebate levels should differ based on power capacity is based
on the assumption that Level 2 and DCFC chargers bring varying levels of capability to the
customer EV charging experience and associated costs. Moreover, bidirectional charging can
deliver broad societal benefits providing resiliency and contributing to a reliable grid. Meanwhile,
comments from several parties support the consideration of incremental capabilities of
bidirectional chargers in the rebate design.20 VGIC believes the rationale for varying rebate levels
based on power capacity can be similarly applied to bidirectional and unidirectional chargers:
each charger type brings varying levels of capability to the customer EV charging experience and
associated costs. With this in mind, and the considerable record providing justification for
offsetting the incremental costs of bidirectional chargers,21 VGIC strongly recommends the
Commission include the following additional guideline for setting LD and MDHD rebate levels:
 “Vary rebate levels based on bidirectional charging capability (i.e., unidirectional vs
bidirectional”
20 Comments of on Staff Proposal of AEE at 14, Nuvve at 5, VGIC at 7. Reply Comments of Fermata at 9.
21 Ibid.
7

Similar to the VGI topics noted above in Section II of VGIC’s comments, the potential to unlock
latent energy storage capacity through this modification to the PD, and the risk of missing the
opportunity to do so, must not be overlooked if the Commission wishes to fulfill the vision of SB
676. California continues to face dire grid reliability challenges due to extreme heat events and
foregoing the opportunity to deploy chargers capable of discharging thousands of megawatts from
millions of EV batteries to provide emergency grid capacity would be a considerable misstep at
this time forgoing significant benefits to California ratepayers.
B. The PD should clarify that marketing, education, and outreach (“ME&O”) efforts
may include partnerships between the FC1 third-party administrator and
automakers or EV service providers.
In Section 3 discussing Issues from the Draft TEF Not Included in the Staff Proposal, the
PD makes note that SANDAG advocates for public-private partnerships to advance ME&O efforts,
while “VGIC similarly asserts that EVSPs could provide a valuable avenue for direct customer
education on rates, programs, and ME&O focused on VGI.”22 The PD finds this to be reasonable,
stating: “We also agree with parties’ arguments that public-private partnerships can advance
ME&O efforts; therefore, we find that the ME&O performed within the FC1 rebate program would
benefit from public-private partnerships.”23 VGIC seeks clarity regarding this statement and
whether automakers, charging providers, and other third-party service providers will be invited to
partner with the FC1 administrator on ME&O. These entities may have stronger existing customer
relationships through installed mobile phone apps or connected vehicle infotainment systems and
would constitute efficient and effective outreach channels.24 VGIC recommends the Commission
require the FC1 administrator to seek partnerships with these entities for ME&O, specifically for
22 PD at 60.
23 PD at 61.
24 VGIC Reply Comments on Draft TEF Chapters 6 and 11 at 9.
8

VGI programs, rates, and other offerings. The Commission should consider what budget should
be allocated to fund these uniquely high impact ME&O partnerships. Moreover, VGIC questions
whether these partnerships should be limited to FC1, and recommends the Commission consider
requiring IOUs to fund ME&O partnerships with automakers and EV service providers using
existing TE program budgets, in addition to FC1.
C. The PD should remove certain minimum EVSE data-sharing requirements that are
not based on clear justification and offer no explanation of how confidential data
will be used.
VGIC appreciates that data sharing can be valuable in recording specific metrics and
tracking progress toward defined policy outcomes. However, the PD requires the following:
“EVSPs shall share, confidentially if needed, the cost of networking and maintenance packages
they offer to customers,”25 yet the underlying justification and details for how this data will be
used are not provided or referenced in the PD. First, the PD does not specify whether this data
must be shared with the IOUs, Program Administrator, CPUC, CEC, or some combination of these
entities. Second, the PD offers no reasoning as to why this data is needed, and VGIC questions
whether the CPUC holds the appropriate jurisdiction to require this data from third-parties (i.e.,
EVSPs) other than the IOUs. Earlier TE rebate programs, such as Charge Ready, may have
benefited from collecting this data, since they provided networking cost rebates for customer-
owned stations to create a level playing field with utility-owned options. However, since FC1 will
not permit utility-owned options and instead focuses on deploying infrastructure, VGIC urges the
Commission to remove this minimum requirement and asserts that the PD does not provide
adequate justification for collecting this confidential and competitive data from EVSPs.
25 PD at 175.
9

IV. RECOMMENDED MODIFICATIONS TO THE PROPOSED CHANGES TO
THE COMMISSION’S POLICY ON AUTOMATED LOAD MANAGEMENT
VGIC appreciates ED staff’s engagement on the issue of ALM, which has understandably
taken a backseat to more pressing VGI issues before the Commission D.20-12-029. Nevertheless,
ALM presents an important opportunity to avoid undue and inequitable ratepayer costs, accelerate
EVSE deployment, promote market-based solutions, align TE policy with state agency directives,
and free up grid capacity for non-TE electrification efforts and distributed energy resources.
However, VGIC is concerned that the PD’s ALM provisions, including the updated definition and
proposed modifications to Ordering Paragraphs 5 and 6 in D.20-12-029 constitute a material
reversal of the Commission’s progress to date on ALM. VGIC believes the PD contains material
omissions related to the justification for making these modifications, and ultimately views these
as steps that inadvertently undermine the requirements in SB 676, overlook the record developed
in this proceeding, and overturn previous Commission directives without sufficient justification.
A. The PD overlooks the extensive argument in support of retaining D.20-12-029’s ALM
provisions and establishing an ALM incentive.
PD Section 4.3.8.1.4 explores the topic of considering ALM, but does not adequately capture
the foundational reasoning for retaining the D.20-12-029’s ALM provisions and offering an ALM
incentive, listed below and constructed throughout the previous three years of this rulemaking:
i. SB 676 Requirement As a general matter, SB 676 requires the CPUC to “establish strategies to
maximize feasible and cost-effective VGI” and states that VGI “means any method of altering the
time, charging level, or location at which… electric vehicles charge…in a manner that…provides
net benefits to ratepayers by doing any of the following…(B) Avoiding otherwise necessary
10

distribution infrastructure upgrades.”26 In response to this statutory requirement, the Commission
adopted strategies in D.20-12-029 to provide these net benefits to ratepayers and maximize VGI,
including adopting ALM as a near-term VGI strategy pursuant to SB 676 and directing IOUs to
take specific ALM-related actions in Ordering Paragraphs 5 and 6. SB 676 also requires the
Commission to reference the VGI strategies adopted in D.20-12-029 in “ongoing and subsequent
proceedings that address issues of transportation electrification…and shall identify how programs
and investments that the Commission may approve will advance the achievement of the
strategies.”27 VGIC considers the statute to be unambiguous, and questions whether the PD’s
proposed modification to the definition, OPs 5 and 6, and the PD’s lack of development of an ALM
incentive is sensible given these clear statutory requirements.
ii. CalGreen stakeholder consensus and implementation of ALM Since the adoption of D.20-12-
029, the California Green Building Standards Code (“CalGreen”) has embraced ALM, stating:
“When low power Level 2 EV charging receptacles or Level 2 EVSE are installed beyond the
minimum required, an automatic load management system (ALMS) may be used to reduce the
maximum required electrical capacity to each space served by the ALMS. The electrical system
and any on-site distribution transformers shall have sufficient capacity to deliver at least 3.3 kW
simultaneously to each EV charging station (EVCS) served by the ALMS.”28
Notably, the development of CalGreen, including the above language specific to ALM, occurred
through considerable stakeholder engagement and due diligence. After vetting the application of
ALM, including potential impacts on equity, the stakeholder consensus determined that CalGreen
could feasibly promote this ALM approach without risking equity concerns (i.e., namely that
drivers’ transportation needs would still be met).
26 SB 676 (Bradford, 2019). Public Utilities Code 740.16.(b)(1).
27 SB 676 (Bradford, 2019). Public Utilities Code 740.16.(e)
28 Building Standards of the California Department of Housing and Community Development Regarding the 2022
California Green Building Standards Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 11. Section 4.106.4.2.2
11

iii. Energization timelines as a Commission priority Promoting ALM can defer or avoid
distribution infrastructure upgrades, cutting down on energization timelines not only for customers
electing ALM but for those not electing ALM who benefit from the additional available grid
capacity that otherwise would have been “used up.” VGIC understands the considerable
energization timelines for EVSE to be a high-priority issue for the Commission and posits that
ALM can significantly reduce the energization timeline for sites where it makes sense for the
customer. Key policy drivers like CARB’s ACC II and the upcoming Advanced Clean Fleets
Regulation will require innovative approaches to promoting ALM.
iv. Ratepayer cost burden and disproportionate impact to low-income customers The ability of
ALM to defer or avoid electrical capacity upgrade costs can benefit all ratepayers under the
paradigm of ratepayer-funded EV Infrastructure Rules and ratepayer-funded BTM Funding Cycle.
At a time when utility bills are rising and disproportionately impacting low-income customers,
VGIC believes ALM could help to partially mitigate the $2.2 billion in ratepayer burden of the EV
Infrastructure Rules expected by 2030.29 VGIC recognizes that similar claims regarding avoided
distribution costs have been made in the past regarding other forms of distributed resources (e.g.,
solar), but in practice these savings have been difficult to capture. However, VGIC believes that
EVSE’s present a “difference in kind” in terms of the practicality of achieving these savings. This
is because in each case, EVSE equipment represents a substantial new load addition, not simply a
reduction or dampening of existing load. Thus, the deferral opportunities are more easily identified
and attributed.
29 Reply Comments of Public Advocates Office on AB 841 Implementation. Page 4.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M366/K442/366442085.PDF
12

v. Customers have no reason to elect ALM solutions, as demonstrated by VGI Reports SCE and
SDG&E VGI Reports indicate that ALM strategies are not promoted or elected within their service
territories. VGIC posits that, due to the structure of the EV Infrastructure Rules and make-ready
programs, site hosts do not get an opportunity to realize significant financial upside from ALM,
and therefore do not elect these solutions. Furthermore, in some cases ALM can enable customers
to more efficiently utilize existing grid infrastructure by fitting EVSE onto existing metering and
service lines, rather than installing new ones. This has the added benefit of allowing greater VGI
opportunities through co-mingling EV loads with other customer loads. However, to VGIC’s
knowledge, none of the existing TE rebate programs includes an element that encourages
customers to use existing meters and service lines.
B. The PD’s revised ALM definition should not be adopted, and stakeholders should be
convened to develop a consensus definition that fits within the vision of SB 676.
The PD offers no justification for the proposed definition, and, to VGIC’s knowledge, did not
publicly solicit stakeholder feedback from the VGI community on the development of the new
definition. In contrast, the initial definitions adopted in D.20-12-029 were developed following
several working group meetings hosted by ED staff and two overlapping comment periods (for a
total of four formal comment sets) on VGI topics in Q3 2020. Moreover, the definition does not
align with the definition in CalGreen, which defines ALM as: “a system designed to manage load
across one or more electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) to share electrical capacity and/or
automatically manage power at each connection point.”30 Specifically, VGIC is concerned that the
proposed definition is not inclusive of upgrades on the customer side of the meter, and questions
30 Building Standards of the California Department of Housing and Community Development Regarding the 2022
California Green Building Standards Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 11. Chapter 2. Section
202.
13

how ALM would interact with FC1, which is focused on customer-side upgrades. While there may
be merit in implementing an ALM program specific to either customer-side or utility-side upgrades
(e.g., separate programs for each), VGIC believes this should be determined in program design,
not through the definition. As such, VGIC strongly urges the Commission to consider scoping the
issues of (1) definition of ALM and (2) ALM incentive design into the Annual VGI Forum.
In conclusion, VGIC is concerned that the PD’s various ALM provisions send a signal to
utilities that they need not pursue ALM implementation in earnest, and is at odds with SB 676 and
D.20-12-029 more broadly. Notably, D.20-12-029 directed SCE to implement ALM in Charge
Ready 2, and D.21-04-014 directed SDG&E to file an Advice Letter to implement ALM in Power
Your Drive Extension. In contrast, actions taken in this PD appear to roll back progress on ALM,
specifically by revising OPs 5 and 6 in D.20-12-029, sending a mixed signal to SCE and SDG&E
on whether or how to encourage ALM as part of ongoing or future TE efforts. Lack of progress on
ALM implementation risks increasing infrastructure costs to ratepayers, potentially to the tune of
$2.2 billion.31
V. CONCLUSION.
Respectfully submitted,
Edward Burgess
Senior Policy Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
November 3, 2022
31 Reply Comments of Public Advocates Office on AB 841 Implementation. Page 4.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M366/K442/366442085.PDF
14