March 16, 2022
VIA ELECTRONIC FILING
Ms. A. Shonta Dunston, Chief Clerk
North Carolina Utilities Commission
4325 Mail Service Center
Raleigh, North Carolina 27699-4300
Re: Duke Energy Carolinas, LLC’s and Duke Energy Progress, LLC’s Application for
Approval of Electric Vehicle Managed Charging Pilots
Docket Nos. E-7, Sub 1266 and E-2, Sub 1291
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)1 is a 501(c)(6) nonprofit trade association
focused on accelerating the role smart EV charging and discharging through policy development,
education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to a decarbonized transportation
and electric sector by ensuring the value from EV deployments and flexible EV charging and
discharging is recognized and compensated in support of achieving a more reliable, affordable,
and efficient electric grid.
VGIC is pleased to support Duke Energy’s proposed EV Managed Charging Pilot and
urges the North Carolina Utilities Commission to approve the proposal. VGIC believes that this
innovative program will deliver value for program participants, utility ratepayers, and the grid, as
well as generate valuable lessons learned to support the scaling of vehicle-grid integration (VGI)
technologies in Duke Energy’s service territory. The scaling of VGI programs and offerings will
help accomplish the following public policy goals:
• Benefit drivers and fleet owners by reducing the total cost of EV ownership.
• Decarbonize the transportation sector by accelerating EV adoption.
• Support the decarbonization of the power sector by providing essential grid flexibility
services as renewable energy and distributed energy resource penetration increases.
• Increase affordability by reducing electricity bills for all customers.
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., dcbel, Enel X North America,
Inc., ENGIE NA, Fermata Energy, FlexCharging, Ford Motor Company, General Motors Company, Nissan, Nuvve
Holding Corporation, Sacramento Municipal Utility District, Stellantis N.V., Sunrun, The Mobility House, Toyota
Motor North America, Inc., Veloce Energy, Inc., and WeaveGrid. The views expressed in these comments are those
of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all individual VGIC member companies or supporters.
(https://www.vgicouncil.org/).
1

• Improve grid resiliency and security during extreme weather events using vehicle-to-
building systems.
• Foster economic activity through innovation, competition, and market transformation.
Additionally, since the delivery of meaningful system and customer benefits can only be
achieved at scale, VGIC encourages Duke to ensure that there is a clear path towards scaling the
program beyond the pilot phase if it is deemed successful. While utility managed charging for
the pilot is reasonable, any future program should encourage third-party aggregators to serve this
function. It is worth noting that only a small subset of vehicle models is eligible to participate
under Duke’s proposal. Although VGIC supports this pilot as a first step, VGIC recommends
that Duke should soon consider expanding eligibility to include other vehicles with similar
telematics-based control technologies.
Lastly, VGIC recommends that Duke should continue to explore additional VGI offerings
beyond the proposed pilot. Commercial EV fleets with predictable operational schedules may
similarly have the potential for the coordination and optimization of EV charging and should be
considered in future program offerings. EVs can also utilize bidirectional capabilities to provide
on-site backup power and behind-the-meter customer bill management (vehicle-to-building, or
V2B) as well as exports to the grid (vehicle-to-grid, or V2G) which can enhance system
reliability. A portfolio of VGI offerings that cover all customer segments and that leverage both
unidirectional and bidirectional capabilities will help maximize the grid and customer value of
EVs.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments and looks forward to
working with Duke and the Commission to ensure that EVs are fully leveraged to support North
Carolina’s decarbonization goals.
Respectfully submitted,
Zach Woogen
Policy Specialist
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
2