Comments of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council on the Final Proposed Advanced Clean Cars II – ZEV
Assurance Measure Proposals
May 31, 2022
I. Introduction
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)1 is a 501(c)(6) membership-based trade association
committed to advancing the role of electric vehicles (EVs) and vehicle-grid integration (VGI) through
policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to a decarbonized
transportation and electric sector by ensuring the value from flexible EV charging and discharging is
recognized and compensated in support of a reliable, affordable, and efficient electric grid. VGIC
appreciates the opportunity to provide comments to the California Air Resources Board (CARB) on the
proposed Advanced Clean Cars (ACC II) regulations, particularly the ZEV Assurance Measure Proposals
regarding battery durability.
II. VGI technologies and services stand to play a pivotal role in helping California achieve several
important policy goals, including global leadership on greenhouse gas reductions
VGI is a broad term that includes a variety of possible technologies and use cases for EVs to
employ unidirectional managed charging (V1G), provide on-site backup power and behind-the-meter
customer bill management (Vehicle-to-Building, or V2B), or export power to the grid (Vehicle-to-Grid, or
V2G). Additional applications include residential emergency power backup during blackouts and the use
of EVs for powering homes during on-peak hours (Vehicle-to-Home or V2H), and providing emergency
power backup to a section of the grid or “microgrid” (Vehicle-to-Microgrid or V2M). These technologies
and services target two of the largest sectors contributing to California’s overall greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions contribution: transportation and electricity. As such, VGI will play a critical role in helping
California achieve its ambitious GHG emissions reduction goals, as described below.
1. Bidirectional charging is an important state goal
In 2019, SB 676 was signed into law, which directed the state to “establish strategies and
quantifiable metrics to maximize the use of feasible and cost-effective electric vehicle grid integration by
January 1, 2030.”2 This includes “any method of altering the time, charging level, or location at which
grid-connected electric vehicles charge or discharge” (emphasis added).3 Additionally, the California
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., dcbel, Enel X North America,
Inc., Engie, Fermata Energy, FlexCharging, Inc., Flo/AddEnergie, Ford Motor Company, FreeWire, General Motors,
Nissan North America, Inc., Nuvve Corporation, Stellantis N.V., Sunrun, The Mobility House, Toyota Motor North
America, Inc., Veloce Energy, Inc., Wallbox, and WeaveGrid. The views expressed in these comments are those of
VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all individual VGIC member companies or supporters.
(https://www.vgicouncil.org/).
2 SB 676. Bradford, 2019. https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billTextClient.xhtml?bill_id=201920200SB676.
See Public Utilities Code Section 740.16(c).
3 Id at 740.16(b)(1)
1

Public Utilities Commission (“CPUC”) has ordered California’s major investor-owned utilities to
implement up to $35 million in VGI and bidirectional charging pilots4, offer standard interconnection
pathways for bidirectional charging equipment5, and design rates to encourage bidirectional charging.6
Meanwhile, the California Energy Commission (“CEC”) Energy Research and Development division
continues to prioritize bidirectional charging solutions for backup power7 and to support grid reliability.8
Recently, the Governor’s Budget Proposal earmarked $200 million for emerging ZEV opportunities to
provide “support for vehicle grid integration at scale.”9 Together, these actions highlight that
bidirectional charging (i.e., V2G, V2H, V2B, V2M) is an important state goal for California.
2. VGI aids decarbonization of the transportation sector by accelerating EV adoption
The transportation sector is the largest source of GHG emissions in California, accounting for
almost 40% of statewide emissions in 2019.10 To address this, Governor Newsom’s Executive Order N-
79-20 sets a target for 100% of in-state sales of new passenger cars and trucks be zero-emission by 2035
and for 100% of medium- and heavy-duty vehicles in the state be zero-emission by 2045.11 VGI can
directly help California achieve these goals by accomplishing the following:
 Reducing the total cost of EV ownership by lowering charging costs and unlocking new
revenue streams for EV owners and fleet operators
 Unlocking new customer value proposition beyond mobility, such as home backup
power and grid services when a vehicle is not in use
 Unlocking new revenue streams for vehicle manufacturers, thereby improving the
business case for scaling up EV product design, manufacturing, marketing, and sales
 Improving the utilization of public charging infrastructure so that investments in
charging equipment and grid infrastructure upgrades can stretch further.
3. VGI aids decarbonization of the power sector by providing essential grid services as
renewable energy penetration increases
4 CPUC Decision 20-12-029.
5 CPUC Decision 20-09-035.
6 CPUC Proceedings A.20-10-011 and A.21-12-008.
7 CEC GFO-21-303 “Vehicle-to-Building Technologies for Resilient Backup Power”
https://www.energy.ca.gov/solicitations/2021-10/gfo-21-303-vehicle-building-technologies-resilient-backup-
power
8 CEC “Electric Program Investment Charge Proposed 2021-2025 Investment Plan”
https://efiling.energy.ca.gov/GetDocument.aspx?tn=240609 at 111-126.
9 https://www.ebudget.ca.gov/2022-23/pdf/BudgetSummary/ClimateChange.pdf at 83.
10 CARB. California Greenhouse Gas Emissions for 2000 to 2019: Trends of Emissions and Other Indicators.
https://ww3.arb.ca.gov/cc/inventory/pubs/reports/2000_2019/ghg_inventory_trends_00-19.pdf
11 Executive Order N-79-20. https://www.gov.ca.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/9.23.20-EO-N-79-20-
Climate.pdff
2

SB 100 requires 100% of electric retail sales to customers in California to be from renewable and
zero-carbon energy resources by 2045.12 As the share of solar and wind power on the grid increases in
support of this goal, a number of essential grid reliability services will need to be provided by clean
resources instead of traditional fossil fuel resources. VGI-enabled EVs can play an important role in this
transition by providing these services, including:
 Load shift and demand response
 Resource adequacy
 Flexible operating reserves (spin and non-spin)
 Frequency regulation
 Frequency response
Crucially, electric vehicles with VGI capabilities stand to provide a new source of generation to the grid
during critical peak load hours. This can assist in avoiding heat wave-driven blackouts, such as those
California experienced in August 2020 due to a 4,400 MW capacity deficiency. Meanwhile VGI, and
specifically bidirectional charging, can help to make up for some of this capacity deficiency. In fact, in
July 2021, Governor Newsom signed an emergency proclamation to expedite clean energy projects that
relieve demand on the electrical grid during extreme weather events this summer and in coming years.13
In response, the California Public Utilities Commission established a new VGI aggregation program
(Emergency Load Reduction Program: Customer Group A.5) to leverage electric vehicle exports (i.e.,
V2G) to contribute to this effort.
In addition to these near-term, emergency reliability imperatives, California will also need 13.6 GW of
battery storage capacity by 2032 and over 40 GW by 2040 to ensure reliability, according to California’s
latest Integrated Energy Policy Report (“IEPR”).14 This unprecedented level of investment will likely cost
many billions of dollars and could put upward pressure on electricity costs and affordability. However,
V2G solutions, if unlocked through appropriate rules and regulations, is poised to become a valuable
and significant class of battery storage that can contribute to this overall need in an affordable manner
by leveraging EVs. In fact, VGIC estimates every 1 million EVs could, in theory, provide about 5-10 GW of
V2G resources.15In addition to GHG reductions in the transportation and power sectors, VGI can also
assist the achievement of other important policy goals described below.
4. VGI can increase energy affordability by reducing electricity bills for all customers
12 SB 100. https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billTextClient.xhtml?bill_id=201720180SB100
13 https://www.gov.ca.gov/2021/07/30/governor-newsom-signs-emergency-proclamation-to-expedite-clean-
energy-projects-and-relieve-demand-on-the-electrical-grid-during-extreme-weather-events-this-summer-as-
climate-crisis-threatens-western-s/
14 https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Published/G000/M451/K412/451412947.PDF
15 Assuming an average of 5 kW of export capability per vehicle. The actual, real-world capability of V2G for a
portfolio of 1 million vehicles, for example, will be subject to certain limitations.
3

VGI can increase the affordability of electricity bills in two distinct ways. First, VGI can help limit
overall electricity system cost increases and, in turn, limit future customer bill increases. By leveraging
already deployed EVs to provide necessary grid services, VGI offers an approach that can be more cost-
effective than traditional means of providing the same services. For example, it can reduce the need to
build new power plants to meet peak demand. VGI can also provide more flexible resources to manage
the integration of wind and solar, and it can take advantage of abundant, low-cost solar energy in the
daytime to power EV charging at night. Second, in addition to directly reducing system costs, VGI can
help reduce electricity bills, even for non-EV owners. Because VGI plays a role in accelerating EV
adoption, it also helps place downward pressure on overall electricity rates by increasing the total
volume of electricity sales (i.e., kWh) relative to the grid’s fixed costs.
5. VGI can improve grid resiliency and security, including during wildfire risks events
The prospect of more frequent grid reliability events, such as extreme weather events and
wildfire risk, creates an urgent need to enhance grid resiliency, as expressed by Governor Newsom’s July
31st Emergency Proclamation.16 VGI capabilities can be leveraged to reduce EV charging load as well as
export power to the grid to help ease peak demand and thus are particularly suitable to support
contingency programs under the Emergency Proclamation. Additionally, California’s public safety power
shutoff (PSPS) events highlight the need for microgrids to support vulnerable communities, as well as
the value of on-site backup power for customers experiencing an outage. VGI-enabled vehicles can offer
a solution by using EV batteries as a source of backup power during outage events. This approach could
provide a relatively cost-effective microgrid solution as well as unlock a new value proposition for
customers seeking backup power during a planned or unplanned outage. Meanwhile, by using EVs as
sources of backup power, this can provide a cleaner alternative to fossil fuel backup generators in
support of state microgrid and resiliency priorities.
6. VGI can foster economic activity through innovation, competition, and market
transformation
The multifaceted ecosystem of firms engaged in the VGI marketplace reflects the depth and
diversity of private investment. As an example, over 50 automotive original equipment manufacturers
(OEMs), EV supply equipment companies, and EV service providers are engaged on the topic of VGI in
California, as demonstrated during the 2019-2020 Joint Agency VGI Working Group. These market
participants engage with equipment and software providers, project developers, financers, engineering,
procurement, and construction companies, and operations & maintenance experts. VGI is well
positioned to leverage existing strengths in the high-tech industry to build a vital new segment of the
clean energy and transportation economies.
16 Proclamation of a State of Emergency. https://www.gov.ca.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/Energy-
Emergency-Proc-7-30-21.pdf
4

III. Battery durability requirements set by CARB through ACC II should account for VGI activities
Battery degradation is a complex topic and depends on chemistry, temperature, use case, and
other factors. Some VGI activities, especially those utilizing bidirectional charging capabilities, will
require additional battery cycling that will impact long-term battery durability. While the exact level of
cycling will depend on the specific VGI use case and could vary based on customer behavior, it is
reasonable to expect that in the future most EVs could experience some incremental level of
degradation due to VGI activities.
Given the extensive public and private benefits that VGI can offer, as detailed above in Section II, it is
paramount that any battery durability requirements CARB establishes for EVs not inadvertently
foreclose VGI opportunities. Setting overly-stringent durability requirements that limit VGI activities –
whether intentionally or not – conflicts with CARB’s larger mission of reducing emissions and
accelerating EV adoption.
VGIC is concerned that the battery durability and warranty requirements currently being considered by
CARB under ACC II could place arbitrary restrictions on VGI activities, while simultaneously adding cost
to EVs at a time when we are all collectively looking to expand the market. VGIC appreciates CARB’s
intent to ensure consumer protection and customer satisfaction with EV ownership through robust
durability standards. However, overly stringent requirements that constrain battery cycling could also
constrain the novel set of value propositions that VGI offers and would otherwise spur EV adoption (e.g.,
home backup power, payment for grid services, etc.). Overly stringent battery durability requirements
could drive OEMs to limit the range, performance, and/or state of charge, or take other measures to
provide for sufficient degradation margin in later years. As such, VGIC believes that CARB should
consider an approach to durability requirements that balances consumer protection via battery
longevity with other near-term customer benefits provided through VGI.
To this end, VGIC believes it may be premature for CARB to set durability requirements that are
significantly out of step with the international community, which is in the process of trying to address
these specific VGI-related concerns. For example, there are ongoing efforts by the Informal Working
Group on Electric Vehicles and the Environment under the United Nations Economic Commission for
Europe (UN ECE) to develop minimum performance requirements for EV batteries that include V2X
considerations. This Working Group is chaired by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and
includes the European Commission, individual European and Asian countries, as well as industry
stakeholders from around the world. The overall battery durability requirements currently
contemplated by the Working Group is 80% of battery energy after 5 years/100,000 kilometers (km) and
70% after 8 years/160,000 km, much lower than CARB’s proposed durability requirement of 80% of
range for 10 years/150,000 miles (240,000 km).17 In order to account for VGI activities, the Working
17 United Nations Economic Commission for Europe – Informal Working Group on Electric Vehicles and the
Environment. Proposal for a new UN GTR on In-Vehicle Battery Durability for Electrified Vehicles.
5

Group is also considering a “virtual km” mechanism, in which the energy discharged by the EV battery in
bidirectional mode is converted to a km-equivalent via a predetermined formula.18 The total mileage
used for confirming the compliance with the performance requirements would consist of the sum of the
km driven and the virtual km. While VGIC is not necessarily endorsing this specific approach or
methodology, we believe that CARB must implement an agreed upon method to account for VGI battery
degradation such as the UN Global Technical Regulation “virtual miles” before adopting a final ACC II
regulation. ACC II would then enable manufacturers to determine a path forward for customers to
access the various additional services that EVs can provide besides mobility. VGIC believes that reduced
stringency on durability standards to accommodate VGI will not only help improve the value proposition
of EVs for customers, but will help accelerate California’s transition to a ZEV future.
IV. CARB should consider how ACC II could accelerate VGI technologies and services.
CARB has an opportunity in ACC II to not only remove barriers to VGI technologies and services, but also
to actively promote VGI as a key strategy to reduce both primary and secondary transportation
emissions. VGIC welcomes a more in-depth dialogue on this and offers itself as a resource on VGI topics
for CARB staff and decision makers.
V. Conclusion
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments and looks forward to working with
CARB to ensure that EVs are fully leveraged to support California’s decarbonization goals.
Respectfully submitted,
Ed Burgess
Senior Policy Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
https://wiki.unece.org/download/attachments/128420965/Based%20on%20GRPE-83-
09%208%209%20July%202021%20EC%20US%20proposal.docx?api=v2
18 For example, see the following presentation on V2X virtual mileage at the 50th EVE IWG meeting:
https://wiki.unece.org/download/attachments/128420289/Input%20on%20V2X%20virtual%20mileage.pptx?api=v
2
6