Comments of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
on the Distribution Circuit Multiplier Draft Guideline
Introduction
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)1 is a 501(c)(6) membership-based trade
association focused on accelerating the role of smart electric vehicle (EV) charging and
discharging through policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the
transition to a decarbonized transportation and electric sector by ensuring the value from EV
deployments and flexible EV charging and discharging is recognized and compensated in
support of achieving a more reliable, affordable, and efficient electric grid. VGIC appreciates the
opportunity to provide comments to the Massachusetts Department of Energy Resources
(DOER) on the Clean Peak Standard Distribution Circuit Multiplier (DCM) Draft Guideline.
Energy Storage and Demand Response Resources Should be Eligible for the DCM
EV supply equipment (EVSE) can participate in Clean Peak Standard as either a Demand
Response Resource (DRR) or a Qualified Energy Storage System (QESS). However, under
DOER’s Draft Guideline, only Generation Units are eligible for the DCM and are able to reserve
capacity on DCM-eligible circuits. The exclusion of other resources, including EVSE, fails to
recognize their potential value in helping to mitigate distribution system upgrades. When EVSE
– whether participating as a DRR or QESS – reduces charging power and/or discharges energy
during the Seasonal Peak Periods under the Clean Peak Standard program, these resources help
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., Customized Energy Solutions,
dcbel, Enel X North America, Inc., ENGIE NA, Fermata Energy, FlexCharging, FLO EV Charging, Ford Motor
Company, FreeWire Technologies, Inc., General Motors, Kaluza, Nissan Group of North America, Nuvve Holding
Corporation, Sacramento Municipal Utility District, Stellantis N.V., Sunrun, Switch EV Ltd, The Mobility House,
Toyota Motor North America, Inc., Veloce Energy, Inc., Wallbox USA Inc., and WeaveGrid. The views expressed
in these Comments are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all individual VGIC member
companies or supporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/).
1

mitigate peak load on distribution circuits in the same way that Generation Units do, helping to
provide the grid benefits the DCM is intended to support. This is consistent with DOER’s
previous Straw Proposal, under which Demand Response, RPS Class I/II, BTM storage, and
standalone storage2 are all eligible to receive the DCM on circuits with increasing peak demand.3
In fact, EVSE load reduction and exports can even be better candidates for distribution
upgrade mitigation than generation resources. Unlike generation resources, which may trigger
capacity upgrades on distribution circuits, load reduction and exports through EVSE are often
incremental functionalities added on top of equipment and infrastructure that are already
deployed to provide EV charging services. VGIC strongly urges DOER to revise the Draft
Guideline to make clear that resources that are not Generation Units are also eligible for the
DCM. If EVSE is not encouraged by the DCM, Massachusetts will miss out on a significant
source of load flexibility – including both load reduction and exports – that can help mitigate
distribution system upgrades and support the Commonwealth’s clean energy and decarbonization
goals.
VGIC Supports the Overall Structure of DOER’s DCM Draft Guideline
Aside from the eligibility issue discussed above, VGIC is encouraged by DOER’s overall
proposed DCM structure. Simplicity in the design and implementation of the DCM will promote
administrative efficiency as well as provide more certainty and predictability for VGI efforts,
including those by charging station developers, aggregators, and other parties such as fleet
owners.
Particularly, VGIC appreciates DOER’s proposal to allow resources to reserve capacity
on specific DCM-eligible circuits. DOER’s Straw Proposal, which was to make the DCM
available until the calendar quarter in which the designated eligible MW on the circuit is filled,
would have resulted in significant uncertainty for developers. It would be difficult for a
2 Standalone storage must accept operating limitations in its ISA and/or accept EDC DERMS signals to limit system
operations to be eligible for the DCM.
3 https://www.mass.gov/doc/cps-dcm-straw-proposal/download
2

developer to predict when the designated MW on a given circuit would be filled since the timing
would depend on all developers seeking to participate in the Clean Peak Standard program. By
ensuring that a developer with reserved capacity on DCM-eligible circuits does not face the risk
of the available eligible capacity running out before the project is completed, the updated DCM
availability in the Draft Guideline strikes an appropriate balance between providing certainty for
developers and avoiding the overdevelopment of resources.
Conclusion
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments and looks forward to
working with the DOER to ensure the success of the Clean Peak Standard Program.
Respectfully submitted,
Ed Burgess
Senior Policy Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
3