Comments of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
on the EPA Clean School Bus Program
To: US Environmental Protection Agency, Region 9: Air and Radiation Division
From: Vehicle-Grid Integration Council,
with support from the following organizations:
Leadership Circle Members:
 American Honda Motor Co., Inc.
 Enel X North America, Inc.
 Ford Motor Company
 General Motors Company
 Nissan
 Nuvve Holding Corporation
 Stellantis N.V.
 Toyota Motor North America, Inc.
General Members:
 dcbel
 ENGIE NA
 Fermata Energy
 FlexCharging
 The Mobility House
 Sunrun
 Veloce Energy, Inc.
 WeaveGrid
Subject: Clean School Bus Program
Contact:
Ed Burgess
Senior Policy Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
2150 Allston Way, Suite 400, Berkeley, CA 94704
eburgess@vgicouncil.org
+1 (941) 266-0017
www.vgicouncil.org
Page 1 of 5

Vehicle-Grid Integration:
Unlocking EVs as a Strategic Grid Resource
Vehicle-grid integration represents a unique opportunity to establish and advance US leadership
at the intersection of a decarbonized transportation and electric sector by ensuring the value
from flexible electric vehicle charging – and discharging – is recognized and compensated.
The Clean School Bus Program will directly support deployment of electric school buses which,
if enabled, will have untapped potential as crucial, flexible resources to support the evolving
electricity grid. Managed charging and vehicle-to-grid technology provides opportunities for
customers to capture additional benefits, from reduced charging costs and integration with on-site
generation and storage, to backup power and payment for exports. By unlocking these key benefits,
the Clean School Bus Program can have a much larger impact in accelerating the widespread
adoption of electric school buses.
Vehicle Grid Integration Council (VGIC) is a 501(c)(6) nonprofit trade association focused on
accelerating the role of smart EV charging and discharging through policy development,
education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to a decarbonized transportation
and electric sector by ensuring the value from EV deployments and flexible EV charging and
discharging is recognized and compensated in support of achieving a more reliable, affordable,
and efficient electric grid. Scaling VGI will help accomplish the following public policy goals:
 Benefit fleet owners by reducing the cost of ownership.
 Decarbonize the transportation sector by accelerating EV adoption.
 Support decarbonization of the power sector by providing essential grid services as
renewable energy and distributed energy resource penetration increases.
 Increase affordability by reducing electricity bills for all customers.
 Improve grid resiliency and security during extreme weather events.
 Foster economic activity through innovation, competition, and market transformation.
With federal support and thoughtful Clean School Bus Program design, we believe this vision
could become a reality and that school districts and other entities across the United States can
take part in the acceleration of both transportation electrification and grid decarbonization. Our
vision for VGI encompasses the following key elements:
 Ensure mobility needs are satisfied. School bus fleets will be able to participate in a wide
variety of VGI services, nationwide, without compromising their mobility function.
 Managed charging will provide benefits to school bus fleets: School bus fleets in every state
will be given the choice to align charging with the times of day when electricity prices are low,
reducing operating costs by as much as 50% compared to unmanaged charging. Lowering the
total cost of ownership will help to accelerate overall electric school bus adoption.
 EVs provide emissions-free emergency power during blackouts: During extreme weather
blackouts or other power outages, electric school buses can utilize two-way charging and
discharging capabilities to send energy to a building or microgrid, serving as a generator and
providing safe backup power.
Page 2 of 5

 Charging infrastructure dollars go further: Smarter management of EV charging will help
manage the cost of deploying EV charging infrastructure, which encourages wider access to
EV charging with equal or lower overall cost burden.
 Electric school buses provide necessary services to the grid and get paid for it: V1G
(unidirectional charging) and vehicle-to-grid (“V2G” – bidirectional charging) will enable
electric school buses to both receive and feed power back to the grid, supporting advanced grid
services such as frequency control, demand response, peak shaving, and more. For customers
and end-users such as school districts and their fleet managers, V1G and V2G services (load
management, demand charge management, and participation in distribution utility demand
response programs) also provide significant benefits in the form of operational savings.
Providing these services can unlock new revenue streams for electric school buses, lowering
the total cost of ownership.
VGI is a unique opportunity for the EPA to establish and advance US leadership in affordable,
decarbonized, reliable, and resilient transportation and electricity. We are grateful to the US
Environmental Protection Agency for this comment opportunity. The VGIC would be happy to
further discuss any part of these comments in a follow-up meeting.
1. A higher level of funding should be made available for V2G-capable school buses and
chargers. V2G stands to offer substantial public benefits as electric school bus deployment
scales up. However, for these benefits to be fully realized, it is critical that VGI capabilities be
considered and built into infrastructure investments as they are deployed, rather than after-the-
fact. Bidirectional electric school buses and chargers can support grid reliability and
community resiliency in the face of aging grid infrastructure and increasingly frequent extreme
weather events. The incremental costs of deploying and enabling bidirectionality can thus
create a significant public benefit that should be partially or fully offset under the Clean School
Bus Program.
It is also worth noting that incorporation of VGI technologies is not limited to physical
infrastructure, but extends to communications and control architecture, as well. For example,
stakeholders should consider the potential benefits of leveraging in-vehicle telematics to enable
certain VGI use cases. VGIC believes both charging station and EV-based VGI solutions
should be enabled through the new Clean School Bus Program. Together with the physical
layer, the communication and control architecture needed to unlock VGI constitute the
guardrails of VGI business models. VGIC recommends the Clean School Bus Program support
VGI use cases while remaining open to supporting various EV aggregator business models, as
it is too early – and not the federal government’s role – to pick winners and losers in the VGI
market. However, VGI-related activities should still be an eligible option for any projects
supported by the Clean School Bus Program.
2. Prepare for the coming wave of commercially-available VGI offerings by educating
school districts, school bus fleet operators, as well as regulators and policy-makers. The
deployment of electrified transportation across the US represents a paradigm shift, and moving
common thinking from “mpg” to “kWh” requires considerable outreach and education. For
Page 3 of 5

many school bus fleets, converting to electrified school buses is a significant undertaking that
lies outside of their existing expertise. Given the potential complexity of VGI, more policy
support is needed to direct funding toward educating school bus fleets not only of the benefits
of electrification in general, but the enhanced value proposition that VGI technologies can
offer. These value propositions include new potential revenue streams from grid services,
reduced charging infrastructure costs, reduced charging energy costs, new bill management
options, and enhanced resilience of critical facilities. The Clean School Bus Program should
guide applicants to partner with original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”) and EV service
providers to ensure customer education expertise of these stakeholders are adequately
leveraged.
VGIC also suggests the Clean School Bus Program educate local government and municipal
applicants on the need to assess and enhance their purchasing practices to better facilitate
electric school bus deployment. Specifically, municipal ledgers should account for savings and
revenue, such as those generated from VGI, rather than focusing on capital expenses. This will
help to level the playing field for electric buses that have a higher capital cost but lower total
cost of ownership. This practice will also more accurately reflect the financial viability of VGI-
enabled buses and chargers.
In addition to educating applicants and end-users, it will also be important to educate regulators
and policy makers who may play a key role in overseeing the development of VGI programs
and rules by local utilities or government agencies.
3. Facilitate streamlined interconnection policies across the country to support advanced
VGI opportunities. In California, VGIC and other stakeholders have collaborated closely with
utilities and their regulators to advance V2G functionality, including both V2G Direct Current
(“V2G-DC”) and V2G Alternating Current (“V2G-AC”) configurations. This has ultimately
led to the creation of a permanent V2G-DC interconnection pathway, and a temporary V2G-
AC interconnection pathway. Despite this progress, it is not guaranteed that V2G systems can
easily interconnect across the country since interconnection rules are governed individually at
the state level and each utility typically has its own process. Meanwhile, OEMs must design
products for a national marketplace and must contend with the possibility of a patchwork of
interconnection rules and processes. VGIC strongly recommends the EPA facilitate efforts to
streamline V2G interconnection pathways across the U.S., which may include clarifying how
V2G systems can interconnect under existing interconnection rules. This could be done in
partnership with the Department of Energy and Department of Transportation as these agencies
implement the EV Charging Program.
Additionally, there is a growing need to align utility distribution service connection and utility
distributed energy resource (“DER”) interconnection approaches, such that customers are
subject to an easy and streamlined process. VGIC recommends that the EPA encourage electric
utilities involved in Clean School Bus Program projects to align distribution service connection
and DER interconnection approaches, such that customers are subject to a streamlined
experience. For example, V2G interconnection approval (under current DER interconnection
processes) has historically been a lengthy process relative to the time it takes to connect and
begin operating EV chargers in load-only mode. Customers should not be prohibited from
operating bidirectional chargers in load-only mode while they await approval to operate in
bidirectional mode. Similarly, customers wishing to deploy co-located renewable generation
Page 4 of 5

and/or stationary energy storage on-site with the EV charging infrastructure should experience
a streamlined interconnection process.
In some states, existing interconnection pathways may already be sufficient and could serve as
a blueprint for streamlined processes that could be developed in other states. VGIC believes
the development of a national V2G interconnection blueprint to be a high-priority task that
could be conducted in conjunction with the development of the Clean School Bus Program.
VGIC envisions a future where EVs move across utility service territories – and even states –
with the ability to seamlessly charge and discharge energy. This is only possible if states follow
a common framework, which the EPA and other federal agencies could help establish through
facilitating the development of a simplified customer experience for interconnection.
4. VGIC supports stretching the Clean School Bus Program funds to electrify as many
school buses as possible. One promising solution towards this goal may be to allow and
incentivize optional Automated Load Management (ALM) to install charging
infrastructure at a lower total cost.
Many low-income and disadvantaged communities are served by outdated utility infrastructure
(substations, transformers) that may require significant and costly upgrades to be able to
accommodate school bus charging load. The use of ALM can help mitigate these infrastructure
upgrade costs by reducing the collective peak load at one site, therefore making charging
infrastructure less costly. ALM is a VGI solution that is particularly well-suited for multi-
charger sites such as school bus charging depots.
More specifically, ALM is the use of behind-the-meter technologies that allow for strategic
sharing of charging capacity across multiple charging ports at the same charging site to help
safely connect multiple charging ports whose total nameplate load would otherwise exceed the
rated capacity of the customer connection. This in turn can avoid or defer the need to upgrade
certain distribution system infrastructure to accommodate the new EV charging load. For
example, if a multi-charger site seeks to deploy a charging station with 5 ports, each with a 10-
kW capacity, the distribution upgrades would normally be sized to accommodate 50 kW of
incremental coincidental charging demand, equal to all 5 ports charging at full capacity.
However, ALM can lower the coincident charging demand to 30 kW, or 6 kW per port on
average, when all 5 ports are occupied, thus reducing distribution system upgrades to what is
required for only 3 ports. In this scenario, when only 3 or fewer ports are occupied, the EVs
can still charge at full speed. Having ALM available to customers as an option can lead to
significant savings and ensure that investments in transportation electrification are used
efficiently. Pacific Gas & Electric has worked with EV service providers to implement ALM
solutions at 20 workplace and multi-unit dwelling host sites as of Q4 2020 and saved between
$30,000 and $200,000 per project.1 Southern California Edison also worked with EDF
Renewables PowerFlex to implement ALM to deploy 168 charging stations at $3,000 per port,
significantly less than comparable deployments at $10,000-$15,000 per port without ALM.2
1 Pacific Gas & Electric. 2021. Presentation at CPUC ALM/EV EMS Workshop, Panel 2.
2 EPIC Policy + Innovation Coordination Group. 2021. Transportation Electrification Workstream Report.
https://epicpartnership.org/resources/Transportation_Electrification_Workstream_Report_Final.pdf
Page 5 of 5

VGIC believes that ALM can stretch the Clean School Bus Program funds and ensure more
chargers are installed in more places. We recommend the Clean School Bus Program promote
the use of optional ALM to enable charger and electric school bus deployment at a site where
doing so may otherwise be cost-prohibitive or space-prohibitive due to utility distribution
system upgrades. Optional ALM solutions should be encouraged and incentivized when they
are shown to be comparatively cost efficient versus traditional utility system upgrades. VGIC
advises against mandating ALM requirements on charging infrastructure, as this may result in
inequities by limiting charging capability for end-users. Instead, VGIC recommends ALM be
allowed and incentivized (i.e. a “carrot” rather than “stick” approach) so that deploying ALM
solutions becomes a viable option for those that wish to deploy. VGIC recommends that an
optional, technology-neutral ALM incentive be included in the Clean School Bus Program.
Conclusion
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit this feedback on the Clean School Bus Program. We
look forward to further collaboration with the US EPA and stakeholders on this important
initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
Ed Burgess
Senior Policy Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
eburgess@vgicouncil.org
+1 (941) 266-0017
www.vgicouncil.org
Date: February 10, 2022
Page 6 of 5