December 5, 2022
Hon. Michelle L. Phillips
Secretary
New York Public Service Commission
3 Empire State Plaza
Albany, NY 12223-1350
RE: Case 22-E-0236: Proceeding to Establish Alternatives to Traditional Demand-Based
Rate Structures for Commercial Electric Vehicle Charging
Comments of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
on the Demand Charge Alternative Staff Whitepaper
Introduction
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)1 is a 501(c)(6) membership-based
advocacy group committed to advancing the role of electric vehicles (EVs) and vehicle-grid
integration (VGI) through policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports
the transition to decarbonized transportation and electric sectors by ensuring the value from EV
deployments and flexible EV charging and discharging is recognized and compensated in
support of achieving a more reliable, affordable, and efficient electric grid. VGIC appreciates the
opportunity to provide comments on the Department of Public Service Whitepaper Regarding
Alternatives to the Traditional Demand Charge for Commercial Customer Electric Vehicle
Charging (“Staff Whitepaper”). Additionally, VGIC also addresses the proposals made by the
Joint Utilities and Electrify America at the November 4th Stakeholder Session.
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., Customized Energy Solutions,
dcbel, Enel X North America, Inc., ENGIE NA, Fermata Energy, FlexCharging, FLO EV Charging, Ford Motor
Company, FreeWire Technologies, Inc., General Motors, IoTecha, Inc., Kaluza, Nissan Group of North America,
Nuvve Holding Corporation, Sacramento Municipal Utility District, Stellantis N.V., Sunrun, Switch EV Ltd, The
Mobility House, Toyota Motor North America, Inc., Veloce Energy, Inc., Wallbox USA Inc., and WeaveGrid. The
views expressed in these Comments are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all individual
VGIC member companies or supporters. https://www.vgicouncil.org/.
1

Staff Whitepaper Proposal
VGIC generally supports the proposal made in the Staff Whitepaper for the immediate
implementation of a Commercial Managed Charging Program, followed by an EV Phase-In Rate
Design Solution. Particularly, VGIC is encouraged by Staff’s incorporation of several
recommendations made in VGIC’s initial and reply comments, including the inclusion of EV
charging sites with and without separate meters, as well as incentives for energy storage and
other Automated Load Management (“ALM”) approaches. VGIC also offers the following
feedback as Staff requested in the Whitepaper:
• The added incentive for energy storage and other ALM approaches should be in the form
of an upfront incentive. The deployment of co-located/integrated energy storage or other
ALM approaches (e.g., power sharing) often comes with incremental upfront costs for the
EV charging site host. Given that the proposed Peak Avoidance Incentive already
provides a performance benefit for ongoing peak load reduction, the ALM adder should
be targeted towards offsetting the incremental upfront costs of the hardware or software
necessary to install ALM at the front end. VGIC agrees with Staff’s proposal to use
unspent funds from the DCFC Per-Plug Incentive Program for this purpose. Additionally,
the use of ALM not only helps the EV charging site reduce ongoing costs associated with
peak demand, but also mitigates the amount of distribution (i.e., make-ready)
infrastructure upgrades necessary during the site construction stage. As such, any
incremental costs to fund the ALM adder may also be offset (at least in part) though
reduced distribution system costs. This funding source may be more appropriately
addressed as part of the Make-Ready Program midpoint review, and VGIC encourages
Staff to coordinate between this proceeding and the Make-Ready Program proceeding on
the overall structure and funding sources for incentives for ALM.
• The adder for public chargers and chargers in remote locations should be in the form of
a percentage discount on the customer’s monthly demand charges. A percentage discount
on the customer’s demand charge is the most simple and straightforward mechanism to
provide relief from demand charges for public and remote charging sites. This format is
similar to the upstate utilities’ proposed Operating Cost Incentive Program and Electrify
America’s proposed demand charge credit for public DCFC, as presented during the
November 4th stakeholder session. However, incorporating a demand charge discount
into the Commercial Managed Charging Program, as opposed to replacing the
Commercial Managed Charging Program with a demand charge discount, will help
maintain incentives for load management and help reduce the grid impacts of EV
charging.
• Distribution utilities should offer supply rate options and additional distribution rate
options for EV charging customers. During initial and reply comments, several parties
2

emphasized the need for the Commission to look beyond a “one size fits all” solution and
instead consider a range of solutions. However, the only proposed rate option in the Staff
Whitepaper is the EV Phase-In Rate. VGIC urges Staff and the Commission to explore
additional rate options for EV customers, including dynamic pricing for both the
distribution and supply components, which can help incentivize greater load flexibility
from EV charging customers and unlock significant savings for EV customers who can
align their EV charging with periods with little to no grid constraints. While dynamic
pricing may not be a suitable option for public charging sites, many EV fleets, which are
also a target of PSL §66-s, face the same challenges posed by demand charges but are
able to align their charging schedules with dynamic, granular price signals. Specifically,
VGIC recommends that the utilities offer EV customers (and other customers) a real-time
pricing option for supply. For distribution, Staff and the Joint Utilities should explore
demand charges that are based on average daily demand or measured only during a
narrow peak period (e.g., 4 hours). VGIC offers itself as a resource to collaborate with
Staff, the IOUs, and other stakeholders to develop dynamic pricing tariffs tailored to the
New York context.
• The exemption from Standby Service for energy storage facilities should be expanded to
EV charging customers. As Staff pointed out in the Whitepaper, a situation in which a
charging station is eligible for the EV Phase-In Rate Solution but defaulted to Standby
Service rates could occur at large charging stations that install energy storage, such as
those serving medium- and heavy-duty fleets or large public fast charging sites. This
potential interference could deter these charging sites from installing energy storage to
help manage demand and limit make-ready upgrades. To avoid this potential barrier,
VGIC believes that an exemption from Standby Service rates is warranted for EV
charging customers who install energy storage.
Joint Utilities Proposal
• Joint Utilities’ proposed Immediate-Term Downstate Solution: Con Edison and O&R’s
proposal to implement a Commercial Managed Charging Program in the immediate term
is consistent with the Staff Whitepaper. Therefore, VGIC’s position is similar to that
regarding the Staff Whitepaper, as discussed above.
• Joint Utilities’ proposed Immediate-Term Upstate Solution: The demand charge discount
under Central Hudson, National Grid, NYSEG, and RG&E’s proposed Operating Cost
Incentive Program can be a simple mechanism to help provide relief from demand
charges for EV charging customers. However, the upstate utilities’ proposal to implement
the Operating Cost Incentive Program instead of the Commercial Managed Charging
Program will weaken the incentive for customers to adopt ALM and other strategies to
manage demand. As discussed above, incorporating a demand charge discount into the
3

Commercial Managed Charging Program will both provide demand charge relief and
provide incentives for demand management for commercial EV charging customers in all
utility service territories. To the extent the upstate utility service territories warrant
special focus on demand charge discounts, the Commission could consider different
discount levels for the upstate versus downstate utilities.
Electrify America Proposal
• Electrify America’s proposed demand charge credit for public DCFC: Similar to our
discussion of the upstate utilities’ proposed Operating Cost Incentive Program above, a
demand charge discount/credit for public chargers should be incorporated into Staff’s
proposed Commercial Managed Charging Program.
Conclusion
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments and looks forward to
working with the IOUs, the Commission, and other stakeholders to ensure the success of New
York’s transportation electrification efforts.
Respectfully submitted,
Ed Burgess
Senior Policy Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
4