BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to
Continue the Development of Rates Rulemaking 18-12-006
and Infrastructure for Vehicle (Filed December 13, 2018)
Electrification.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON
THE PROPOSED DECISION ADOPTING PLUG-IN ELECTRIC
VEHICLE SUBMETERING PROTOCOL AND ELECTRIC VEHICLE
SUPPLY EQUIPMENT COMMUNICATION PROTOCOLS
Edward Burgess
Senior Policy Director
Zach Woogen
Policy Manager
VEHICLE GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
10265 Rockingham Dr.
Suite #100-4061
Sacramento, CA 95827
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
July 20, 2022

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to
Continue the Development of Rates Rulemaking 18-12-006
and Infrastructure for Vehicle (Filed December 13, 2018)
Electrification.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON
THE PROPOSED DECISION ADOPTING PLUG-IN ELECTRIC
VEHICLE SUBMETERING PROTOCOL AND ELECTRIC VEHICLE
SUPPLY EQUIPMENT COMMUNICATION PROTOCOLS
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) 1 hereby submits
these comments on the Proposed Decision Adopting Plug-In Electric Vehicle Submetering
Protocol and Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment Communication Protocols (“PD”), issued on June
30, 2022.
I. INTRODUCTION.
VGIC is a 501(c)6 membership-based advocacy group committed to advancing the role of
electric vehicles (“EV”) and vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”) through policy development,
education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to a decarbonized transportation
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., dcbel, Enel X North America,
Inc., ENGIE NA, Fermata Energy, FlexCharging, Flo/AddEnergie, Ford Motor Company, General Motors
Company, Nissan Group of North America, Nuvve Holding Corporation, Sacramento Municipal Utility District,
Stellantis N.V., Sunrun, Switch EV Ltd, The Mobility House, Toyota Motor North America, Inc., Veloce Energy,
Inc., Wallbox USA Inc., and WeaveGrid. The views expressed in these Comments are those of VGIC, and do not
necessarily reflect the views of all individual VGIC member companies or supporters.
(https://www.vgicouncil.org/).
1

and electric sector by ensuring the value from EV deployments and flexible EV charging and
discharging is recognized and compensated to achieve a more reliable, affordable, and efficient
electric grid.
VGIC commends Energy Division Staff for its efforts to advance the use of submetering
in the PD. While VGI aggregators participating in the Emergency Load Reduction Program
(“ELRP”) are permitted to use EV supply equipment (“EVSE”) submetering to measure
incremental load reduction,2 to VGIC’s knowledge this is the only existing submetering pathway
available in California. If the Commission does not act to adopt an EVSE submetering protocol –
or take additional steps to leverage vehicle telematics for the same purpose – other states are poised
to “leapfrog” California by enabling these options at scale. VGIC considers the PD a critical step
in enabling the transportation electrification (“TE”) future that California seeks and strongly
encourages the Commission to expeditiously modify and approve the PD to advance EVSE
submetering and EV telematics.
Specifically, VGIC supports that the PD allows submetering for residential, non-
residential, and multiple-customer-of-record (“MCOR”) customers rather than limiting
submetering to only residential customers. Facilitating customer participation in EV-specific rates,
Demand Response (“DR”) programs, and other VGI programs without having to install a separate
meter is a critical and necessary step to unlocking widespread peak load reductions for EV
charging, enabling key bidirectional charging use cases, accelerating the deployment of EVSE,
and maximizing ratepayer and societal benefits. VGIC also appreciates that the PD utilizes a 1%
lab / 2% field accuracy standard, consistent with the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (“NIST”) Handbook 44 and the California Department of Food and Agriculture’s
2 Energy Division’s Review and Disposition of Joint Advice Letter 6485-E et al. (June 17, 2022).
2

Division of Measurement Standards (“CDFA-DMS”) requirements. However, VGIC seeks
clarification on crucial implementation steps for the submetering and EVSE communications
protocols. Moreover, VGIC is disappointed that vehicle telematics – a viable form of submetering
– is absent from the PD and recommends steps to address this oversight. Below is a summary of
VGIC’s recommended enhancements to the PD:
 Eligibility
o The Decision should explicitly state that bidirectional chargers that comply with
the submetering protocol are permitted to submeter both EV charging and
discharging.
o ii. The Decision should clarify that non-residential customers (in addition to
MCOR customers) shall not be precluded from participation in submetering
after this Decision, even if there are subsequent efforts to address the remaining
barriers.
 Implementation
o Ordering Paragraph (“OP”) 2 should be modified to direct the utilities to update
their rate tariff sheets in addition to their respective electric rules.
o The Decision should direct each investor-owned utility (“IOU”) to assess and
modify DR programs to ensure customers using EVSE submetering are not
excluded or otherwise put at a disadvantage relative to customers using
separately metered EVSE.
 Approved Submetering List
o The Decision should clarify that a customer may use a device for submetering
once it appears on the Approved Submetering List and that no additional
approvals are necessary. If this is not the case, the Decision should clarify at
which point customers will be made aware of the devices they may use.
o The Decision should direct utilities to maintain a single list of devices that
comply with the applicable accuracy standards rather than duplicate lists.
 EVSE Standards
o The Decision should exempt EVSE used for bidirectional charging purposes
from the proposed Combined Charging System (CCS) and International
Organization for Standards (“ISO”) 15118 requirements to avoid mistakenly
putting an abrupt end to critical ongoing efforts to pilot, demonstrate, and scale
bidirectional charging use cases.
o The Decision should align the Open Charge Point Protocol (“OCPP”) 1.6 and
ISO 15118 requirements with the California Energy Commission’s (“CEC”)
California EV Infrastructure Project (“CALeVIP”) and National EV
Infrastructure (“NEVI”) program implementation timelines.
3

o OP 6 should be modified to clarify that “ratepayer-funded or utility-
administered programs” refers only to EVSE rebates for ratepayer-funded
“make ready” programs and Low Carbon Fuel Standard (“LCFS”)-funded
programs and does not include DR programs or pilots, VGI programs or pilots,
and EV rates.
o The Decision should reference existing standards for bidirectional chargers to
promote marketplace awareness.
 Telematics
o The Decision should reference the numerous party comments related to
telematics and include corresponding Findings of Fact (“FOF”).
o The Decision should direct Energy Division staff to host a workshop within 60
days to discuss telematics, prepare a workshop report, and seek comments on
the workshop report.
Additionally, VGIC has detailed specific redline edits to the PD in Appendix A to this document,
which address the recommendations above.
II. RECOMMENDED ENHANCEMENTS TO THE PROPOSED DECISION.
A. Eligibility
i. The Decision should explicitly state that bidirectional chargers that comply with the
submetering protocol are permitted to submeter both EV charging and discharging.
Bidirectional chargers that comply with the submetering protocol should be eligible for
submetering. Currently, customers seeking to use bidirectional charging systems to provide
vehicle-to-home (“V2H”) or vehicle-to-building (“V2B”) backup power to their site must forego
the opportunity to participate in compelling EV-specific rates, which require separate metering.
Similarly, customers seeking to use V2B bidirectional charging systems to meet site load, for
example, to manage demand charges, are unable to do so if they wish to take service under a
compelling separately-metered EV-specific rate. Lastly, without submetering, bidirectional
charging customers looking to take advantage of a vehicle-to-grid (“V2G”) export compensation
mechanism, such as the pending Pacific Gas & Electric (“PG&E”) Day-Ahead Hourly Real-Time
4

Pricing (“DAHRTP”) V2G Export Rate3 or San Diego Gas & Electric (“SDG&E”) Export Rates4
would have to install a separate meter to do so, incurring additional costs and potential delays.
Each of these use cases represents a significant driver of both customer value and ratepayer benefit,
as determined in the VGI Strategies Decision (“D.”) 20-12-029. However, if a separate meter is
still required for bidirectional charging (rather than allowing submetering) then the Commission
would continue to pit two Commission-adopted VGI strategies against each other. Namely, the
VGI strategy of optional dynamic pricing structures5 would be at odds with the VGI strategy of
enabling V2H/V2B backup power, V2B bill management, and V2G exports,6 and customers
would be unable to leverage both. The submetering protocol, however, will unlock tremendous
participant and ratepayer value if bidirectional chargers are deemed eligible for submetering.
Meanwhile, VGIC is not aware of any technical barriers to submetering charging load
using bidirectional chargers. Moreover, there do not appear to be any technical barriers prohibiting
the submetering of kWh discharged from the EV. Notably, bidirectional charging systems
participating in ELRP, EV/VGI Aggregation Customer Group A.5 can already use submetering.
This demonstrates that there are not only no known technical barriers but also likely no
implementation barriers to using bidirectional chargers to submeter both EV charging and
discharging.
The PD and attached submetering protocol as written do not prohibit or exclude
bidirectional chargers. However, VGIC strongly recommends the Decision explicitly state that
3 A.20-10-011. Joint Motion of the Public Advocates Office, VGIC, Electrify America, LLC, and PG&E for Adoption
of Joint Settlement Agreement in PG&E’s DAHRTP Commercial Electric Vehicle Proceeding on Non-NEM Export
Compensation Pilot. Filed June 17, 2022.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M488/K538/488538216.PDF
4 A.21-12-006 and A.21-12-008. Administrative Law Judge’s Ruling Regarding Staff Recommendations and
Workshop. Filed June 15, 2022. Attachment A – Energy Division Recommendations.
5 VGI Strategies Decision D.20-12-029 at 16.
6 VGI Strategies Decision D.20-12-029 at 20 and 32.
5

bidirectional chargers can be used for submetering, including for measuring kWh discharged.
VGIC believes this is critically necessary based on its recent experience engaging on the issue of
submetering for ELRP. In D.21-12-015, the Commission unambiguously directed the three major
IOUs to allow submetering for EVSE participating in ELRP Customer Group A.5, EV/VGI
Aggregations.7 However, in subsequent implementation Advice Letters, the IOUs did not comply
with this Commission directive.8 After VGIC and other parties submitted Protests9 and Energy
Division issued guidance directly to the IOUs,10 they submitted substitute sheets to permit
submetering in ELRP Customer Group A.5.11 Given the IOUs’ apparent apprehension toward
facilitating submetering, VGIC believes clarity is needed at this time to ensure that bidirectional
charging systems are not inappropriately excluded from submetering despite the underlying
technology and implementation having been proven feasible through ELRP. Appendix A contains
VGIC’s proposed FOF and OP revisions to implement our recommendation.
ii. The Decision should clarify that non-residential customers (in addition to MCOR
customers) shall not be precluded from participation in submetering after this
Decision, even if there are subsequent efforts to address the remaining barriers.
The PD appropriately states, “it is reasonable to allow submetering for MCOR and non-
residential customers, and therefore the utilities shall work to resolve any potential barriers to
submetering for MCOR and non-residential customers.”12 VGIC supports this finding and believes
it is essential to unlocking greater participation in non-residential EV-specific rates as well as
7 D.21-12-015 at 41.
8 Joint ELRP Implementation Joint Advice Letters PG&E 6485-E, SCE 4708-E, and SDG&E 3939-E Attachment A
at 15 (PG&E), Attachment D at 16 (SCE), Attachment F (SDG&E) at 10.
9 Protest of VGIC to Joint Advice Letters 6485-E, 4708-E, 3939-E (February 22, 2022).
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5dcde7af8ed96b403d8aeb70/t/621661d654000f78c2bf84d0/1645634007397/
VGIC%27s+Protest+to+ELRP+Phase+2+Implementation+Joint+Advice+Letter.pdf
10 Energy Division’s Review and Disposition of Joint Advice Letter 6485-E et al. (June 17, 2022).
11 PG&E, SCE, SDG&E. Second Substitute Sheet for Joint Advice Letter 6485-E et al. (April 11, 2022).
12 PD at 22.
6

customer adoption of bidirectional charging use cases such as V2B customer bill management.
Importantly, the PD then states “these ongoing efforts shall not preclude existing MCOR from
participating in submetering if they submit a completed application.” VGIC recommends this
requirement should also apply to non-residential customers, not just MCOR, such that these non-
residential customers can implement submetering beginning 90-days after the Decision as
indicated in OP 4. VGIC recommends OP 4 be modified to further clarify and ensure effective
implementation of this directive. Appendix A contains VGIC’s proposed modification.
B. Implementation
i. OP 2 should be modified to direct the utilities to update their rate tariff sheets in
addition to their respective electric rules.
The PD clearly directs each IOU to file a Tier 2 Advice Letter within 30 days to update
their respective electric rules (e.g., Southern California Edison (“SCE”) Electric Rule 18 and
SDG&E Electric Rule 19) by adding:
“where electricity is furnished for EV charging, a customer may use the EVSE as a submeter
to measure EV charge load, and ancillary EV charging service (i.e., demand response, vehicle-
grid integration, etc.). All EVSE used for submetering purposes must meet the requirements
established in the Plug-in Electric Vehicle Submetering Protocol.”
VGIC supports this provision, but it is unsure that this is the only rule or tariff change required to
unlock submetering for customers. To mitigate against any possible confusion, VGIC respectfully
requests the Commission clarify in the Decision that utilities need to modify individual rate tariff
sheets – in addition to electric rules – in order for customers to take service on EV-only rates
through EVSE submetering. VGIC is concerned about a scenario where, if the existing ruling does
not sufficiently direct IOUs to enable submetering on EV tariffs, the IOUs will file Tier 2 Advice
Letters updating each of their respective electric rules for metering, but then the IOUs will have to
voluntarily update rate tariff sheets before accepting submetering for a customer on a given rate.
7

For example, PG&E’s Electric Schedule EV, Rate B states, “Applies to all applicable customers
with a separately metered BEV or PHEV recharging outlet.”13 Meanwhile, SDG&E’s Schedule
EV-TOU states, “the point of service must contain facilities to separately meter EV charging
facilities…”14 Based on the text in these and other residential and non-residential electric
schedules, it is not readily apparent that the submetering option would be available to customers.
VGIC believes that the IOUs should be required to make minor modifications to each applicable
rate in their Tier 2 Advice Letters to ensure customers can submeter, for example by adding “per
the submetering protocol referenced in Rule 18/19” to each rate tariff’s section related to metering.
VGIC proposes a corresponding modification to OP 2 in Appendix A.
ii. The Decision should direct each IOU to assess and modify DR programs to ensure
customers using EVSE submetering are not excluded or otherwise put at a
disadvantage relative to customers using separately-metered EVSE.
As detailed above in Section II.A.i, there has been confusion in recent efforts to promote
submetering in ELRP, an out-of-market, emergency reliability DR program. In the case of ELRP,
the IOU Terms and Conditions explicitly state that “Upon adoption by the CPUC, the submeter
must meet applicable standards established by the CPUC.”15 However, to mitigate against any
future complications in other DR programs, VGIC respectfully requests that the Commission direct
each IOU to ensure customers using EVSE submetering are not excluded or otherwise put at a
disadvantage relative to customers using separately metered EVSE. Each IOU should file a Tier 2
Advice Letter within 45 days detailing how each active or planned utility DR program or pilot
(i.e., those being considered in DR Portfolio Application A.22-05-002, A.22-05-003, and A.22-
13 PG&E Electric Schedule EV Residential Time-of-Use Service for Plug-In Electric Vehicle Customers at Sheet 1.
14 SDG&E Schedule EV-TOU Domestic Time-of-Use for Electric Vehicle Charging at Sheet 3, Special Condition 2:
Metering.
15 Energy Division’s Review and Disposition of Joint Advice Letter 6485-E et al. (June 17, 2022).
8

05-004) can accommodate both separately metered and submetered EVSE. The Advice Letters
should propose any changes to the DR program or pilot that may be necessary to facilitate customer
participation for both types of EV charging customers.
C. Approved Submetering List
i. The Decision should clarify that a customer may use a device for submetering once
it appears on the Approved Submetering List and that no additional approvals are
necessary. If this is not the case, the Decision should clarify at which point customers
will be made aware of the devices they may use.
VGIC seeks clarity on whether there are additional steps that a vendor needs to take
between getting an EVSE on the Approved Submetering List and that EVSE being available for
immediate use by a customer. As written, the PD depicts the Approved Submetering List as the
final step in the accuracy testing, certification, and verification process. However, if a device
appears on the Approved Submetering List, it is unclear whether it will need to go through
additional steps related to data integration, for example. If this is the case, it is unclear how a
customer will know when a device on the Approved Submetering List can be used in the field for
active submetering. VGIC questions whether additional steps need to be added before a device can
be listed on the Approved Submetering List. Alternatively, the Approved Submetering List could
include some indication of which devices can be used immediately for submetering and which
pass the accuracy standard but are still pending data integration with the utility. Yet another
approach could be for the Approved Submetering List to only contain devices deemed accurate
and a separate list to be used to indicate which devices are immediately ready for use. In the long
term, a unified submeter data backhaul protocol from the meter data management system
(“MDMS”) industry may be needed to streamline data integration and reduce manual billing
reconciliation.
9

ii. The Decision should direct utilities to maintain a single list of devices that comply
with the applicable accuracy standards rather than duplicate lists.
In the case that the Approved Submetering List is ultimately used to indicate devices that
are deemed accurate but not used to indicate data integration with a specific utility, VGIC
recommends a single list be implemented rather than separate lists for each IOU. Since the testing
requirements are standardized in the submetering protocol and therefore identical across each IOU,
it is likely unnecessary for each utility to maintain its own separate list. Instead, VGIC recommends
that the Commission direct the IOUs to collaborate on and maintain a single list of approved
submetering devices. One approach would be for one IOU to establish and maintain the list, and
for each other IOU to reference it. VGIC believes this will reduce delay, confusion, and soft costs
for customers, EV service providers (“EVSP”), and IOUs.
D. EVSE Standards
i. The Decision should exempt EVSE used for bidirectional charging purposes from
the proposed CCS and ISO 15118 requirements to avoid putting an abrupt end to
critical ongoing efforts to pilot, demonstrate, and scale bidirectional charging use
cases
VGIC appreciates the Commission’s overarching efforts to promote standardization as a
tool to advance TE broadly. However, the PD’s provision requiring CCS and ISO 15118 for all
EVSE will directly undermine the Commission’s efforts to promote bidirectional charging as a
VGI Strategy pursuant to SB 676. The Commission recently approved PG&E’s request for VGI
Pilots, totaling $11.7 million, that will use CHAdeMO connectors to discharge from Nissan
LEAFs.16 In addition to being able to comply with the CCS requirement, these CHAdeMO
connectors do not use the ISO 15118 protocol. Meanwhile, the ELRP program is the only large-
16 See Advice Letter 6259-E and Resolution E-5192.
10

scale driver for V2G operations in California, and there exist over 25,000 bidirectionally-capable
Nissan LEAFs in the state that could theoretically support the grid through this critical emergency
DR program. 17 Aside from CHAdeMO equipment, early bidirectional CCS chargers will likely
use the DIN 70121 communication protocol for bidirectional functions rather than ISO 15118.
Lastly, the pending PG&E DAHRTP V2G Export Rate and SDG&E export rate options may soon
provide yet another opportunity for customers to meaningfully support the grid during times of
stress through bidirectional charging. All other bidirectionally-capable vehicles in California
combined amount to a fraction of the Nissan LEAFs currently on California’s roads.18 With this
in mind, VGIC believes that the PD as written would inadvertently put an abrupt stop to key efforts
to advance bidirectional charging by removing support for bidirectional chargers using CHAdeMO
connectors and CCS connectors that do not speak ISO 15118. Given the limited number of
bidirectionally-capable EVs and EVSE, the value in facilitating the nascent bidirectional charging
market, and the Commission’s demonstrated priorities to advance these important use cases, VGIC
strongly recommends the Commission exempt bidirectional chargers from the CCS requirement
and the ISO 15118 requirement at this time. VGIC recommends the Commission revisit the
exemption at a later date when CCS-based and ISO 15118-compliant bidirectional charging is
more commonplace. VGIC recommends corresponding revisions to FOFs and OP 6 in Appendix
A.
ii. The Decisions should align the OCPP 1.6 and ISO 15118 requirements with the
CEC’s CALeVIP and NEVI program implementation timelines.
17 See VGIC’s estimates for bidirectional vehicle deployment in September 1, 2021 Opening Testimony in R.20-11-
003 a 4-10.
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5dcde7af8ed96b403d8aeb70/t/6137a2f643f8bc74a42af9ae/1631036151186/20
21-09-01+VGIC%27s+Opening+Testimony+on+Phase+2+Emergency+Reliability+Proposals+-+FINAL.pdf
18 Ibid.
11

The requirement that ratepayer-funded and utility-administered EVSE meet OCPP 1.6 and
ISO 15118 should align with the CALeVIP and NEVI program implementation timelines. The
CEC is requiring Level 2 chargers to meet OCPP 1.6 and ISO 15118 by September 1, 2022 and
July 1, 2023, respectively. For DC fast chargers, the CEC is requiring OCPP 1.6 and ISO 15118
by September 1, 2022. Meanwhile, the U.S. Department of Transportation Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking regarding NEVI standards and requirements would also require OCPP and ISO
15118. The CEC and California Department of Transportation draft NEVI Deployment Plan states
that projects will commence in Q2 and Q3 of 2023. With this in mind, VGIC recommends that the
Commission attempt to align its OCPP and ISO 15118 requirements with one or, if possible, both
the CALeVIP and NEVI timelines to send clear regulatory signals and reduce confusion in the
marketplace.
iii. OP 6 should be modified to clarify that “ratepayer-funded or utility-administered
programs” refers to rebates for ratepayer- or LCFS-funded EVSE rebates and does
not include DR programs or pilots, VGI programs or pilots, and EV rates.
As written, OP 6 imposes requirements related to all EVSE qualified for ratepayer-funded or
utilities-administered programs. VGIC is concerned that the term “utility-administered programs”
is too broad and could be interpreted to include DR programs and pilots, VGI programs, rates, and
pilots, and uses of ratepayer funds for TE-related “make ready” upgrades other than EVSE (e.g.,
panel upgrades, trenching, conduit, etc.). Under this interpretation, existing customers with
CHAdeMO chargers, Level 1 chargers, and chargers that do not speak ISO 15118 would be shut
out of participation in ELRP, VGI programs and pilots, and other utility DR programs and pilots.
This would result in significant lost opportunities to reduce peak demand, integrate renewable
energy generation, and support the grid during times of extreme stress. VGIC recommends OP 6
12

be revised as shown in Appendix A to ensure California can maximize the cost-effective use of
VGI pursuant to SB 676.
iv. The Decision should reference existing standards for bidirectional chargers to
promote marketplace awareness.
The PD discusses and directs standardization around OCPP and ISO 15118 as common
protocols for ratepayer-funded and utility-administered EVSE. However, VGIC notes that
bidirectional DC EVSE seeking interconnection under Rule 21 are also subject to certain
communication standards. Beginning in spring 2023 with the implementation of UL 1741 SB,
distributed energy resources (“DER”) including bidirectional DC EVSE must be able to speak
DNP-3, SunSpec Modbus, or IEEE 2030.5. To promote general awareness in the marketplace,
VGIC recommends that the Decision reference these communication protocols in addition to the
discussion on OCPP and ISO 15118.
E. Telematics
i. The Decision should reference the numerous party comments related to telematics
and include corresponding FOF.
VGIC recognizes that the record related to vehicle telematics in this proceeding may not
be as well-developed as the record related to EVSE submetering. However, it remains unclear why
party comments related to telematics are entirely absent from the PD’s discussion, FOF,
Conclusions of Law (“COL”) and OPs. Party comments in this proceeding highlight that using
vehicle telematics represents an effective strategy to manage charging, can complement networked
EVSE program participation, and is being implemented around the country to result in up to 95%
13

off-peak charging.19 Critically, using telematics can support equity, customer choice, and access
by expanding program and rate participation to customers with non-networked EVSE, those who
use Level 1 charging, and those who may simply prefer to participate via vehicle telematics rather
than networked EVSE.20 To unlock telematics as a tool to yield customer, ratepayer, utility, and
societal value, VGIC recommends (1) the topic of vehicle telematics be discussed and referenced
in the Decision and (2) FOF, COL, and OPs be modified accordingly.
Since the issuance of the Draft TE Framework (“TEF”) and filing of the Final EV Submetering
Protocol (“EVSMP”), the lines between non-TEF and TEF topics (and between different TEF
topics) have been blurred.21 A reasonable scope of comments and filings in the DRIVE proceeding
– including those discussing telematics – should therefore be considered in the record for the
purposes of this Decision. VGIC believes it is appropriate to consider and reference the following
comments and filings in the DRIVE proceeding that provide information related to telematics:
 Comments on TEF Sections 9, 10, and 1222
 Reply Comments on TEF Sections 9, 10, and 1223
19 See, for example, Comments of WeaveGrid on “Revised TEF” / TE Funding Cycles & Behind-the-Meter
(“BTM”) Rebate Program Staff Proposal at page 4 and Reply Comments of VGIC on “Revised TEF” / TE Funding
Cycles & Behind-the-Meter (“BTM”) Rebate Program Staff Proposal at pages 4-5, including footnote 8 showing
listing VGI programs using EVSE submetering and vehicle telematics and footnote 9 containing studies that show
value in offering both EVSE submetering and vehicle telematics options
20 For example, commercial fleet owner/operators that pay for all charging when employees take home vehicles to
charge overnight.
21 Since the 2020 Draft TEF comment periods, the Commission issued the VGI Strategies Decision 20-12-029, EV
Infrastructure Rules Resolution E-5167, and several other key Decisions and Resolutions. In the VGI Strategies
Decision, the Commission considers party comments on “VGI-related topics in the Draft TEF”, comments in
response to July 20, 2020 ALJ ruling seeking comments on VGI WG report, and the contents of VGI WG report
itself. In Resolution E-5167, the Commission addresses both Responses/Protests on the ALs as well as comments on
January 15, 2021 Assigned Commissioner’s Ruling Regarding Implementation of AB 841. Subsequently,
Commissioner Rechtschaffen’s February 25, 2022 Assigned Commissioner’s Ruling Adding Staff Proposal to the
Record and Inviting Party Comments discusses the interactions between AB 841 and the Draft TEF and suggests
that the EV Infrastructure Rules have deemed sections of the Draft TEF irrelevant. Moreover, the Submetering PD
itself references comments on the submetering protocol as well as comments on topics in the TEF.
22 See Comments of VGIC on TEF Sections 9, 10, and 12 at 4-5, 11, and 16-17 detailing vehicle telematics as a low-
cost metering solution.
23 See Reply Comments of VGIC on TEF Sections 9, 10, and 12 at 7-8 detailing vehicle telematics as a low-cost
metering solution.
14

 Comments on VGI Issues24
 Comments on the “Revised TEF” / TE Funding Cycles & Behind-the-Meter (“BTM”)
Rebate Program Staff Proposal25
 Reply Comments on the “Revised TEF” / TE Funding Cycles & BTM Rebate Program
Staff Proposal26
 Comments on Draft Resolution E-516727
 PG&E Advice Letter 6226-E and Non-Standard Disposition Letter Approving PG&E’s
2021 LCFS Holdback Implementation Plan28
 SCE Advice Letter 4542-E Requesting Approval for Proposed VGI Pilots29
 SDG&E’s 2024-2027 DR Portfolio Application – while not filed in the DRIVE proceeding
– also discusses telematics-based VGI30
Below are notable telematics-related findings from these filings that VGIC believes should be
referenced in the Decision:
“A recently published Opinion Dynamics study for PG&E’s service territory found that both
vehicle telematics and EVSE are valuable technologies for responding to demand response
events.”31
“Notably, many of these example programs publish a list of eligible equipment, and utilities
offering both vehicle telematics and EVSE submetering pathways, as expected, have the
24 See Joint Comments of VGIC, Enel X, AEE, CESA, Chargepoint, EDF, Greenlots, NRDC, Siemens on VGI
Issues at 18 detailing vehicle telematics as a valuable data source for measuring success of VGI strategies.
25 See Comments of VGIC on Staff Proposal at 13-14, including footnote 21 listing VGI programs using EVSE
submetering or vehicle telematics; Comments of WeaveGrid on Staff Proposal at 4 and 8 detailing Baltimore Gas &
Electric, Xcel Energy, and Portland General Electric telematics programs, PG&E’s Resilient Charging Pilot, and
SCE’s proposed Large-Scale Residential V1G Pilot; and Comments of Alliance for Automotive Innovation on Staff
Proposal at 9-10, including footnote 5 detailing Duke Energy’s Managed Charging Pilot.
26 See Reply Comments of VGIC on Staff Proposal at 4-5, including footnote 8 showing listing VGI programs using
EVSE submetering and vehicle telematics and footnote 9 containing studies that show value in offering both EVSE
submetering and vehicle telematics options; and Reply Comments of WeaveGrid on Staff Proposal at 4-5, including
footnote 3 citing the CEC’s recent managed charging study and footnote 4 citing BG&E’s telematics program
evaluation.
27 See Comments of VGIC on Draft Resolution E-5167 at 8 detailing benefits of enabling comingled EV and site
load through EVSE submetering or vehicle telematics.
28 See PG&E’s Resilient Charging Pilot relying on vehicle telematics.
https://www.pge.com/tariffs/assets/pdf/adviceletter/ELEC_6226-E.pdf
29 See SCE’s proposed Large-Scale Residential V1G Pilot using vehicle telematics.
30 See SDG&E DR Portfolio Application in A.22-05-003 detailing an EVSE submetering and vehicle telematics-
based EV DR Pilot.
31 Reply Comments of WeaveGrid on Staff Proposal at 4. Cites PG&E Electric Vehicle Automated Demand
Response Study Report. Opinion Dynamics, February 2022.
CALMAC Study ID PGE0469.01. https://opiniondynamics.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/PGE-EV-ADR-Study-
Report-3-16.pdf
15

largest list of eligible equipment and, in turn, offer the greatest amount of customer choice and
access.” 32
“As part of the rates program, customers using telematics are charging more than 95% off-
peak.”33
“[Telematics] would especially benefit Low and Moderate Income EV drivers by giving the
opportunity to save money on charging without any incremental costs.”34
“Utilizing lower power and non-networked charging equipment has important equity and
access benefits” 35
“Telematics supports more choices in charging for customers participating in managed
charging programs. Telematics solutions are compatible with networked Level 2 charging as
well as non-networked and/or Level 1 while enabling customers to participate in managed
charging programs.”36
In Appendix A, VGIC recommends new FOFs to better encapsulate the existing record on
telematics.
ii. The Decision should direct Energy Division staff to host a workshop within 60 days
to discuss telematics, prepare a workshop report, and seek comments on the
workshop report.
As noted above, telematics has been detailed in numerous party comments as an important
VGI strategy. However, we recognize that the Commission likely needs additional details on
telematics before enabling its use for customer billing purposes. To address these outstanding
issues, VGIC recommends the Commission direct Energy Division staff to host a workshop within
60 days to discuss telematics, including an overview of the technology and capabilities,
opportunities for telematics to support California’s TE and grid decarbonization goals, examples
32 Reply Comments of VGIC on Staff Proposal at 5. Cites list of VGI programs offering both EVSE submetering
and telematics as participation options.
33 Comments of WeaveGrid on Staff Proposal at 4.
34 Comments of Alliance for Automotive Innovators on Staff Proposal at 9.
35 Reply Comments of WeaveGrid on Staff Proposal at 4.
36 Comments of WeaveGrid on Staff Proposal at 8.
16

of telematics use, and barriers and recommendations. Staff should consult with stakeholders before
finalizing the workshop agenda. Following the workshop, staff should prepare a workshop report
within 30 days and parties should be invited to submit formal comments on the workshop report.
VGIC suggests a new OP in Appendix A related to implementing this recommendation in the
Decision.
III. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit these comments on the Proposed Decision.
We look forward to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
Edward Burgess
Senior Policy Director
VEHICLE GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
July 20, 2022
17

Appendix A: VGIC Recommended Modifications to the Proposed Decision
Note: Proposed changes are shown in strikeout and underline
P.22: “These ongoing efforts shall not preclude existing MCOR and non-residential customers
from participating in submetering if they submit a completed application”
Findings of Fact
2. An embedded submeter in an a unidirectional or bidirectional EVSE either owned by the
customer or a third party and operated and maintained by either the customer or a third party is the
best ownership option.
New FOF: Decision 21-12-015 has resulted in utilities accepting submetering for both EV
charging and discharging for purposes of the Emergency Load Reduction Program.
New FOF: Updates to both electric rules and individual rate tariff sheets are necessary to enable
EV-only billing pursuant to the EV Submetering Protocol.
New FOF: Utility demand response programs and pilots would benefit from submetering.
New FOF: The utilities are best positioned to collaborate on a single Approved Submeters List
that indicates whether an approved submeter is available for use or pending data integration.
New FOF: Telematics is in use today around the country at a significant scale and can lead to up
to 95% off-peak charging.
New FOF: Expanding program and rate participation has important equity and access benefits
New FOF: Telematics can expand program and rate participation to non-networked EVSE,
customers who use Level 1 charging, and customers who prefer to participate via vehicle
telematics rather than networked EVSE.
New FOF: It is reasonable to pursue submetering via vehicle telematics
New FOF: Additional understanding of telematics is needed to allow the use of vehicle telematics
as PEV submeters for participation in EV-only rates.
New FOF: The bidirectional charging market is still nascent and a limited number of bidirectional
CHAdeMO and CCS charger models are available currently.
Conclusions of Law
1. Customers or third parties should own, operate, and maintain unidirectional and bidirectional
PEV.
3. The Commission should require all PEV submeters – including PEV submeters in bidirectional
chargers - to meet the applicable and most up-to-date certificate tests used by CDFA-DMS to
18

certify submeter accuracy for non-publicly accessible EVSE (i.e., all tests with the exception of
display requirements).
5. The Commission should require the utilities to maintain and publish on their websites a shared
lists of approved EVSE submeters and/or approved submeter equipment that indicates whether a
device has certified accuracy and is pending data integration or has already completed the
necessary data integration steps and is ready for immediate use.
12. The Commission should require all ratepayer-funded AC-conductive EVSE to utilize SAE
J1772 connectors and DC-conductive EVSE to utilize CCS connectors for light-duty use cases,
but the Commission should not extend this requirement to bidirectional EVSE or medium- and
heavy-duty EVSE.
14. The Commission should require the utilities to implement the EVSE communication protocols
recommended by the CEC and adopted in recent Commission decisions for ratepayer- and LCFS-
funded EVSE, but the Commission should not exclude other EVSE from DR programs or pilots,
VGI programs or pilots, and EV rates and should not extend this requirement to bidirectional
EVSE.
16. While completing the necessary upgrades to the utilities’ billing systems, the Commission
should require the utilities to perform billing reconciliation for submetered EV charging and
discharging customers.
New COL: The Commission shall consider outstanding issues related to the use of vehicle
telematics for PEV submetering.
Ordering Paragraphs
2. Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Southern California Edison Company, San Diego Gas &
Electric Company, Liberty Utilities (CalPeco Electric) LLC, Bear Valley Electric Service Inc., and
PacifiCorp d/b/a Pacific Power shall each file a Tier 2 advice letter within 30 days of issuance of
this decision updating their respective electric rules and individual rate tariff sheets to implement
the adopted Plug-in Electric Vehicle Submetering Protocol consistent with Section 3 of this
decision.
4. Within 90 days of issuance of this decision, Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Southern
California Edison Company, San Diego Gas & Electric Company, Liberty Utilities (CalPeco
Electric) LLC, Bear Valley Electric Service Inc., and PacifiCorp d/b/a Pacific Power shall publish
a shared list of approved submetering equipment and each begin accepting plug-in electric vehicle
submetering applications and shall perform billing reconciliation for residential, non-residential,
and multiple customers of record (MCOR) plug-in electric vehicle submetered customers using
either unidirectional or bidirectional chargers, while completing the necessary upgrades to their
billing systems.
6.
2) By October 2022, all direct current conductive light-duty ratepayer- or LCFS-funded
EVSE qualified for light-duty use cases in ratepayer-funded or utility-administered
19

programs must be equipped with a Combined Charge System connector with the exception
of conductive EVSE capable of bidirectional charging;
4) By July 2023October 2022, all ratepayer- or LCFS-funded EVSE qualified for
ratepayer-funded or utility-administered programs must be International Organization for
Standards (ISO) 15118 ready with the exception of conductive EVSE capable of
bidirectional charging. ISO 15118-ready chargers are equipped with onboard hardware that
enable high-level communications with the vehicle using ISO 15118. An ISO 15118-ready
charger is capable of, at minimum, the following: a) powerline carrier based high-level
communications as specified in ISO 15118-3; b) secure management and storage of keys
and certificates; c) Transport Layer Security (TLS) version 1.2, with additional support for
TLS 1.3 or subsequent versions recommended to prepare for future updates to the ISO
15118 standard; d) receiving remote updates to activate or enable ISO 15118 use cases; e)
connecting to a backend network; and f) selecting the appropriate communication protocol
used by the vehicle.
New OP: Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Southern California Edison Company, San Diego
Gas & Electric Company, Liberty Utilities (CalPeco Electric) LLC, Bear Valley Electric Service
Inc., and PacifiCorp d/b/a Pacific Power shall each file a Tier 2 advice letter within 30 days of
issuance of this decision detailing how each active or planned utility demand response program or
pilot can be modified to accommodate both separately metered and submetered EVSE, and request
any necessary changes to these programs and pilots to facilitate customer participation for both
types of EV charging customers.
New OP: Within sixty (60) days of issuance of this decision, Energy Division staff shall host a
public workshop to explore pathways to allow customers to use vehicle telematics as PEV
submeters. The Energy Division staff should consult with stakeholders to develop the workshop
agenda which should address, at a minimum:
1) Overview of technology & capability
2) Opportunities for telematics to support California’s TE and grid decarb goals
3) Example implementations of telematics
4) Barriers and recommendations
Within 30 days of hosting the workshop, Energy Division staff shall prepare a workshop
report summarizing the issues and parties’ positions and recommended solutions to
overcome the issues. The workshop report shall be entered into the record and parties shall
be invited to submit comments on the workshop report.
20