Comments of the Vehicle Grid Integration Council
on Reducing Soft Costs Associated with the Construction of L2 and DCFC Chargers
To: The United States Department of Energy, Vehicle Technologies Office
From: Vehicle Grid Integration Council,
with support from the following organizations:
Leadership Circle Members:
 American Honda Motor Co., Inc.
 Enel X North America, Inc.
 Ford Motor Company
 General Motors Company
 Nissan Group of North America
 Nuvve Holding Corporation
 Stellantis N.V.
 Toyota Motor North America, Inc.
General Members:
 dcbel
 ENGIE NA
 Fermata Energy
 FlexCharging
 FLO EV Charging
 FreeWire Technologies, Inc.
 Sunrun
 Switch EV Ltd
 The Mobility House
 Veloce Energy, Inc.
 Wallbox USA Inc.
 WeaveGrid
Contact:
Zach Woogen
Policy Manager
Vehicle Grid Integration Council
10265 Rockingham Dr.
Suite #100-4061
Sacramento, CA 95827
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
+1 (510) 665-7811
www.vgicouncil.org
1

Defining Vehicle Grid Integration (VGI):
Vehicle grid integration represents a unique opportunity to establish and advance US leadership
at the intersection of decarbonized transportation and electric sectors by ensuring that the value
from flexible electric vehicle charging and discharging is recognized and compensated.
Reducing Soft Costs Associated with EV Charger Deployment with VGI
Vehicle Grid Integration Council (VGIC) is a 501(c)(6) nonprofit trade association focused on
accelerating the role of smart EV charging and discharging through policy development,
education, outreach, and research. VGI solutions, including managed charging, automated load
management, and vehicle-to-everything (“V2X”) bidirectional charging systems, can play a
critical role in reducing an EV’s total cost of ownership (“TCO”). These solutions can lower capital
costs (i.e., through automated load management or “ALM”) and reduce operational costs (i.e.,
managed charging and V2X bidirectional charging systems) for the deployment of EV supply
equipment (“EVSE”). Both ALM and V2X bidirectional charging systems can also provide value
as a source of power to support on-site load and backup power to support customer or community
resiliency.
We appreciate the opportunity to share the below recommendations for reducing soft costs
associated with deploying Level 2 (“L2”) and Direct Current Fast Chargers (“DCFC”) and look
forward to further collaboration with the Vehicle Technologies Office and other stakeholders on
this critical initiative.
1. Automated Load Management (ALM) strategies can reduce energization timelines and
associated costs by deferring or even completely avoiding the need for certain
distribution utility infrastructure upgrades and other make-ready work. ALM solutions
include:
a. Software-based approaches that share available electrical capacity among EVSE: Sites
with multiple EVSE and long dwell times, including workplace charging sites and
multi-unit dwellings, are particularly well suited for software-based ALM. Software-
based ALM is used to draw less total power than the aggregate nameplate charging rate
at a site. For example, a site with a combined 76 kW maximum charger demand could
use software to ensure the actual demand does not exceed 62 kW.
b. Battery-integrated EVSE or co-located energy storage systems sized to avoid or defer
the need for additional electrical capacity and infrastructure on both the utility and
customer side of the meter: Sites with short dwell times, including public DCFC
stations and certain fleet charging depots, are particularly well suited to implement
integrated or co-located energy storage as an ALM solution. Batteries can be integrated
into a charging station or external to a charging station but co-located behind the same
meter. These batteries charge from the grid when EVSE utilization and energy costs
are low and discharge to meet EVSE load when utilization and energy costs are high.
For example, using existing battery-integrated EVSE or co-located energy storage
technologies, a site with less than 30 kW of available power could deliver a 200 kW
charge to a single vehicle. Said another way, a site with a 200 kW EV charging demand
can inherently ensure demand will not exceed 30 kW.
New distribution utility and on-site electrical infrastructure can delay service
connection/energization timelines, leading to higher soft costs for EVSE site hosts. For some
EVSE site hosts, ALM solutions can facilitate the interim use of EVSE at a lower power until
any needed distribution utility and on-site infrastructure upgrades are completed, at which point
they can operate at full power. For others, ALM solutions can defer or avoid the need for
2

distribution utility or on-site infrastructure upgrades altogether. In these cases, site hosts
experience reduced time to connect/energize their EVSE and contribute to infrastructure cost
savings which accrue to site hosts, drivers, and utility ratepayers at large. Additionally, ALM
solutions can support other desirable use cases, including managing charging load during peak
electricity demand, lowering demand charges for the site host, enabling EV charging when the
grid goes down, providing backup power to the site host to enhance resilience, or providing
power to the site and ancillary services to the grid. The set of these co-benefits available to a
given site will depend on whether software-based ALM or integrated/co-located energy storage
– or both – strategies are implemented.
Today, utilities do not widely accept or promote ALM solutions, and utility make-ready
programs often do not send the proper price signals to the market thereby undermining any
justification for customers to elect ALM solutions that can right-size infrastructure. VGIC
recommends the following strategies to promote ALM:
 Ensuring it is an option for customers to choose from and not a requirement.
 Conducting marketing, education, and outreach to inform utilities, customers, and utility
regulators of available solutions and the benefits associated with each.
 Offering incentives to site hosts that elect ALM, including (1) a $/kW rebate for
reducing distribution utility infrastructure upgrades, applied to each kW reduced below
aggregate nameplate charger capacity at a site, (2) a fixed incentive for installing EVSE
that avoid the need for make-ready work, and (3) a fixed incentive for installing EVSE
behind existing utility meters. The value of each incentive should be commensurate with
the average cost across a utility’s system to conduct these upgrades.
2. Streamlined and predictable processes for energization and interconnection of
unidirectional EVSE, V2X bidirectional charging systems, and ALM solutions.
Unidirectional charging systems are load-only devices, whereas V2X bidirectional charging
systems can discharge from the EV battery to serve a customer’s onsite electrical load or export
to the grid without compromising a customer’s mobility needs. Unidirectional charging
systems are most common, whereas early deployments of V2X bidirectional charging systems
include providing backup power to a customer’s home or business, using electric school buses
to support the grid during peak electricity demand, and managing customer bills at commercial
sites. Today, customers interested in these use cases, as well as ALM solutions detailed above
in recommendation 1, face delays and confusion that can significantly increase soft costs for
all stakeholders involved.
3

Firstly, VGIC believes that a collective understanding of the following common unidirectional
and V2X bidirectional charging system configurations is needed:
Secondly, VGIC recommends against “reinventing the wheel” for these systems. For example,
if a notification, approval, or interconnection pathway for distributed energy resources
(“DER”) already exists, it is unlikely that a new process would be needed for V2X bidirectional
charging systems. V2X systems used for backup power that can safely disconnect from the
grid can fit within existing notification processes for fossil fuel backup generators.
Additionally, grid-parallel exporting V2X systems fit into existing processes for grid-parallel
exporting DERs. Lastly, the appropriate process, technical requirements, forms, timelines,
closeout documentation, and applicable fees for each configuration should be clear and readily
accessible to customers and installers online. Any requirements for site plans or single-line
diagrams to be certified by a Professional Engineer (PE) should be communicated early in the
process and readily accessible on the utility’s website to the extent feasible.
Additionally, both unidirectional and bidirectional systems should be permitted to submeter
charging load as well as kWh discharged to support the full spectrum of VGI use cases. If
EVSE are required to be on a separate meter – as is currently a condition of receiving make-
ready incentives and eligibility for EV-specific rates in many jurisdictions – site hosts, utilities,
and ratepayers miss out on the resiliency benefits that VGI can provide.
Based on our understanding of the unidirectional and V2X bidirectional charging markets,
developing a shared understanding of common configurations and implementing the above-
mentioned process improvements are critical to reducing soft costs.
3. Grid “hosting capacity” maps and data should be made available and easily accessible to
support siting of L2 and DCFC chargers, especially for large sites. Available electrical
capacity at a certain point on the distribution grid, or “hosting capacity,” will not always be
sufficient to accommodate new L2 and DCFC charger installations. As noted above in
recommendation 1, ALM can help to defer or avoid upgrades when there is no available hosting
capacity. However, steps can be taken earlier in the planning process to ensure charging site
developers can make informed decisions when selecting charging locations. Knowing whether
4

there is hosting capacity at a potential location can support developers looking to determine
the financial feasibility of a project. Additionally, the lack of grid hosting capacity data leads
to project delays and, in turn, increases soft costs.
Depending on the fleet size and duty cycle, the electrification of medium- and heavy-duty
fleets may require significant electrical capacity. Notably, large commercial electric customers
are often located near each other in industrial areas, which further exacerbates the challenges
of medium- and heavy-duty fleet electrification. To reduce both the soft and direct
infrastructure costs needed to accommodate the EV charging load of multiple large commercial
customers, VGIC recommends that nearby fleets collaborate during the planning, design, and
construction phases of charging infrastructure development. Utilities, infrastructure
developers, charging service providers, and other stakeholders must coordinate closely to
streamline charger deployment for these use cases. Notably, there is a significant opportunity
for large and clustered fleet customers to pursue ALM strategies outlined above in
recommendation 1, and these entities should be encouraged and incentivized, though not
required, to consider these options. In addition to hosting capacity maps, VGIC recommends
technical assistance programs, including those administered by utilities, to facilitate the
necessary level of collaboration and ALM promotion for these larger customer sites.
Conclusion
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit this feedback on reducing soft costs associated with
constructing L2 chargers and DCFC. We look forward to further collaboration with the Vehicle
Technologies Office and other stakeholders on this important initiative.
Respectfully Submitted,
Zach Woogen
Policy Manager
Vehicle Grid Integration Council
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
+1 (510) 665-7811
www.vgicouncil.org
Date: July 29, 2022
5