September 1, 2023
Vincent Riscica
NYSERDA
1359 Broadway
New York, NY 10018
Comments of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
on the Eligibility Guidelines for the Public School Bus Electrification Program
Introduction
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)1 is a 501(c)(6) membership-based
advocacy group committed to advancing the role of electric vehicles (“EVs”) and vehicle-grid
integration (“VGI”) through policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC
supports the transition to decarbonized transportation and electric sectors by ensuring the value
from EV deployments and flexible EV charging and discharging is recognized and compensated
in support of achieving a more reliable, affordable, and efficient electric grid. VGIC appreciates
the opportunity to provide comments on NYSERDA’s draft eligibility guidelines for the Public
School Bus Electrification Program.
The Public School Bus Electrification Program will directly support deployment of electric
school buses which, if enabled, will have untapped potential as crucial, flexible resources to
support the evolving electricity grid. Managed charging and vehicle-to-grid (“V2G”) technology
provides opportunities for fleets to capture additional benefits, from reduced charging costs and
integration with on-site generation and storage, to backup power and payment for exports. By
unlocking these key benefits, the Public School Bus Electrification Program can have a much
larger impact in accelerating the widespread adoption of electric school buses. Scaling VGI will
help accomplish the following public policy goals:
• Benefit school districts by reducing the cost of ownership.
• Decarbonize the transportation sector by accelerating EV adoption.
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., BorgWarner, bp pulse,
Customized Energy Solutions, dcbel, Enel X North America, Inc., EnergyHub, Enphase, Fermata Energy,
FlexCharging, FLO EV Charging, Ford Motor Company, FreeWire Technologies, Inc., General Motors, GridWiz,
Hoosier Energy, Innovation Core SEI, IoTecha, Kaluza, Kitu Systems, Ninedot Energy, Nissan Group of North
America, Nuvve Holding Corporation, Peak Power, Qcells, Sacramento Municipal Utility District, Stellantis N.V.,
Sunrun, The Mobility House, Toyota Motor North America, Inc., Utilidata, Veloce Energy, Inc., Wallbox USA Inc.,
and WeaveGrid. The views expressed in these Comments are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the
views of all individual VGIC member companies or supporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/)

• Support decarbonization of the power sector by providing essential grid services
as renewable energy and distributed energy resource penetration increases.
• Increase affordability by reducing electricity bills for all customers.
• Improve grid resiliency and security during extreme weather events.
• Foster economic activity through innovation, competition, and market
transformation.
With thoughtful program design, we believe this vision could become a reality and that
school districts and other entities in New York State can take part in the acceleration of both
transportation electrification and grid decarbonization. Our vision for VGI encompasses the
following key elements:
• Ensure mobility needs are satisfied. School bus fleets will be able to participate
in a wide variety of VGI services without compromising their mobility function.
• Managed charging will provide benefits to school bus fleets: School bus fleets
will be given the choice to align charging with the times of day when electricity
prices are low, reducing operating costs by as much as 50% compared to
unmanaged charging. Lowering the total cost of ownership will help to accelerate
overall electric school bus adoption.
• EVs provide emissions-free emergency power during blackouts: During
extreme weather blackouts or other power outages, electric school buses can utilize
two-way charging and discharging capabilities to send energy to a building or
microgrid, serving as a generator to support essential services and provide safe
backup power for communities.
• Charging infrastructure dollars go further: Smarter management of EV
charging will help manage the cost of deploying EV charging infrastructure,
encouraging wider access to EV charging with equal or lower overall cost burden.
• Electric school buses provide necessary services to the grid and get paid for it:
V1G (unidirectional charging) and V2G (bidirectional charging) will enable
electric school buses to both receive and feed power back to the grid, supporting
advanced grid services such as frequency control, demand response, peak shaving,
and more. For customers and end-users such as school districts and their fleet
managers, V1G and V2G services (load management, demand charge management,
and participation in distribution utility demand response programs) also provide
significant benefits in the form of operational savings. Providing these services can
unlock new revenue streams for electric school buses, lowering the total cost of
ownership and accelerating progress towards New York’s climate goals.
VGI is a unique opportunity for NYSERDA to establish and advance New York’s
leadership in affordable, decarbonized, reliable, and resilient transportation and electricity. VGIC

provides the following recommendations for the Public School Bus Electrification Program and
would be happy to further discuss any part of these recommendations in a follow-up meeting.
A Higher Level of Funding Should be Made Available for V2G-Capable School Buses and
Chargers
Bidirectional charging use cases can leverage EVs’ latent battery capacity to provide
backup power, manage electric bills, and support the grid through V2G exports. Revenues from
V2G exports can offset the relatively higher upfront costs of electric school buses and associated
charging infrastructure and improving the financial viability of electrification projects. Electric
school buses are the premier use case for V2G today: bidirectional vehicles and EVSE are
commercially available for the electric school bus sector,2 and V2G exports are eligible for
compensation under the VDER tariff in New York.
V2G stands to offer substantial public benefits as electric school bus deployment scales up.
However, for these benefits to be fully realized, it is critical that VGI capabilities be considered
and built into infrastructure investments as they are deployed, rather than after-the-fact.
Bidirectional electric school buses and chargers can support grid reliability and community
resiliency in the face of aging grid infrastructure and increasingly frequent extreme weather events.
The incremental costs of deploying and enabling bidirectionality can thus create a significant
public benefit that should be partially or fully offset under the Public School Bus Electrification
Program, similar to how the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) included V2G enabled
equipment under its Clean School Bus Program.3
2 See, for example: Nuvve Corporation. Blue Bird Delivers North America’s First-Ever Commercial
Application of Vehicle-to-Grid Technology in Electric School Bus Partnership with Nuvve and Illinois
School Districts. March 23, 2021. https://nuvve.com/blue-bird-v2g-electric-bus-with-nuvve-and-illinois-
school-districts/; Thomas Built Buses / Daimler Trucks North America LLC (2021). The Safe-T-Liner
C2 Jouley Electric School Bus. https://thomasbuiltbuses.com/school-buses/saf-t-liner-c2-jouley; Lion
Electric. Lion Electric Announces Successful Electric School Bus Vehicle-to-Grid Deployment with Con
Edison in New York. December 14,
2020. https://thelionelectric.com/img/medias/LION_Press_Release_White%20Plains%20EN%20FINAL.
pdf; NuvveCorporation (2020). Nuvve DC Heavy Duty Charging Station Specifications
Sheet. https://nuvve.com/wpcontent/uploads/2020/04/nuvve-dc-heavy-duty-spec-sheet-1.0.pdf; Fermata
Energy. Proven Results and Cost Savings with V2G Technology. October 14,
2020. https://www.fermataenergy.com/news-press/proven-results-andcost-savings-with-v2g-technology;
BorgWarner. V2G Charging, Control, and Management 60- 500kW:
Bidirectional. https://www.borgwarner.com/technologies/chargers#bidirectional-v2g-charger;
BorgWarner: Pioneering Commercial Vehicle-To-Grid in Electric School Buses.
https://cdn.borgwarner.com/docs/default-source/san-diego-documents/bw-00369-case-study-highland-
electric-fleets.pdf?sfvrsn=2efbcc3d_12.
3 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2023 Clean School Bus Grant Program Notice of Funding Opportunity,
pg. 18. https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-04/2023-csb-grant-nofo-4-20-23.pdf

NYSERDA Should Incentivize Automated Load Management to Install Charging
Infrastructure at a Lower Total Cost
Many communities, especially low-income and disadvantaged communities, are served by
outdated utility infrastructure (e.g., substations, transformers) that may require significant and
costly upgrades to be able to accommodate school bus charging load. The use of Automated Load
Management (“ALM”) approaches can help mitigate these infrastructure upgrade costs by
reducing the collective peak load at one site, therefore making charging infrastructure less costly.
ALM is a VGI solution that is particularly well-suited for multi-charger sites such as school bus
charging depots.
More specifically, ALM is the use of behind-the-meter software (e.g., power sharing) or
hardware (e.g., integrated or co-located energy storage) approaches to limit EV charging demand
at the service connection to a predetermined level below the aggregated nameplate charging
capacity of the EV chargers. For example, a charging site with five 150 kW DCFCs can use ALM
to limit its peak demand to 600 kW, compared to a peak demand of 750 kW without ALM. This
in turn can mitigate the need to upgrade certain distribution system infrastructure to accommodate
the new EV charging load. The reduced need for infrastructure upgrades can generate savings for
the customer installing EVSE and ratepayers at large and can accelerate the energization timeline
for that site due to the lower overall engineering and construction needs. The potential cost and
time savings from ALM can be considerable given the significant infrastructure needs of electric
school buses. Additionally, ALM can be used to overcome physical space constraints in locations
where it is difficult to upgrade electrical equipment, also helping to accelerate installation and
energization timelines. As examples of potential cost savings, Pacific Gas & Electric has worked
with EV service providers to implement ALM solutions at 20 workplace and multi-unit dwelling
host sites as of Q4 2020 and saved between $30,000 and $200,000 per project.4 Southern California
Edison also implemented ALM to deploy 168 charging stations at $3,000 per port, significantly
less than comparable deployments at $10,000-$15,000 per port without ALM.5
ALM can stretch the Public School Bus Electrification Program funds and ensure more
chargers are installed in more places. We recommend the Public School Bus Electrification
Program promote the use of ALM to enable charger and electric school bus deployment at a site
where doing so may otherwise be cost-prohibitive or space-prohibitive due to utility distribution
system upgrades. Optional ALM solutions should be encouraged and incentivized when they are
shown to be comparatively cost efficient versus traditional utility system upgrades. VGIC advises
against mandating ALM requirements on charging infrastructure, as this may result in inequities
by limiting charging capability for end-users. Instead, ALM should be allowed and incentivized
4 Pacific Gas & Electric. 2021. Presentation at CPUC ALM/EV EMS Workshop, Panel 2.
5 EPIC Policy + Innovation Coordination Group. 2021. Transportation Electrification Workstream
Report. https://epicpartnership.org/resources/Transportation_Electrification_Workstream_Report_Final.pdf

so that deploying ALM solutions becomes a viable option for those that wish to do so. The EPA’s
Clean School Bus Program recognized the benefits of ALM technologies by including “charge
management software” and “battery energy storage systems” as eligible charging infrastructure
equipment.6 VGIC recommends that charging infrastructure incentives under the Public School
Bus Electrification Program similarly cover the costs of ALM technologies.
Fleet Education Activities, Including Fleet Electrification Plans, Should Account for VGI
Functionalities
The deployment of electrified transportation across the US represents a paradigm shift, and
moving common thinking from “mpg” to “kWh” requires considerable outreach and education.
For many school bus fleets, converting to electrified school buses is a significant undertaking that
lies outside of their existing expertise. Given the potential complexity of VGI, more policy support
is needed to direct funding toward educating school bus fleets not only of the benefits of
electrification in general, but the enhanced value proposition that VGI technologies can offer.
These value propositions include new potential revenue streams from grid services, reduced
charging infrastructure costs, reduced charging energy costs, new bill management options, and
enhanced resilience of critical facilities. The Public School Bus Electrification Program should
guide applicants to partner with original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”) and EV service
providers to ensure customer education expertise of these stakeholders are adequately leveraged.
VGIC also suggests that fleet electrification plans funded by the Public School Bus
Electrification Program account for savings and revenues, such as those generated from VGI,
rather than focusing only on capital expenses. This will help to level the playing field for electric
buses that have a higher capital cost but lower total cost of ownership. This practice will also more
accurately reflect the financial viability of VGI-enabled buses and chargers, helping school
districts and fleet operators make more informed decisions for their electrification projects.
Conclusion
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments on the Public School Bus
Electrification Program. We look forward to further collaboration with NYSERDA and
stakeholders on this important initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
Ed Burgess
6 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2023 Clean School Bus Grant Program Notice of Funding Opportunity,
pg. 18. https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-04/2023-csb-grant-nofo-4-20-23.pdf

Senior Policy Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
(510) 665-7811
www.vgicouncil.org