October 27, 2023
Hon. Michelle L. Phillips
Secretary
New York Public Service Commission
3 Empire State Plaza
Albany, NY 12223-1350
RE: Case 22-E-0236: Proceeding to Establish Alternatives to Traditional Demand-Based
Rate Structures for Commercial Electric Vehicle Charging
Comments of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
On the Joint Utilities’ Proposed Near-Term Solutions
Introduction
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC) is a 501(c)(6) membership-based advocacy
group committed to advancing the role of electric vehicles (“EVs”) and vehicle-grid integration
(“VGI”) through policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the
transition to decarbonized transportation and electric sectors by ensuring the value from EV
deployments and flexible EV charging and discharging is recognized and compensated in
support of achieving a more reliable, affordable, and efficient electric grid. VGIC appreciates the
opportunity to provide comments on the Joint Utilities’ proposed Near-Term Solutions. VGIC’s
comments will primarily focus on the Upstate Utilities’ Commercial Managed Charging Program
(“CMCP”) proposals.
VGIC Supports the Joint Utilities’ Proposed Near-Term Solutions
By providing drivers and fleets with opportunities to lower charging costs and mitigating
the impacts of EV charging on the grid, managed charging programs are essential for New
York’s transportation electrification efforts. VGIC generally supports the Joint Utilities’
proposed Near Term Solutions filed on July 18, 2023, including the CMCP proposals from the
Upstate Utilities and the EV Phase-In Rate proposals from both the Downstate and Upstate
Utilities. Together, these offerings will both ease the impacts of demand charges on public Direct
Current Fast Chargers (“DCFCs”) as well as encourage charging during off-peak hours.
VGIC supports allowing customers with and without separately metered EV charging
load to participate in the EV Phase-In Rates through the Charging Ratio calculation. This

approach provides a simple and straightforward pathway for customers with EV charging load
comingled with on-site load to take advantage of the lower demand charges offered by the EV
Phase-In Rates. As New York’s efforts in exploring submetering advances and once the
Commission has approved submetering standards and specifications in Docket 18-E-0138, the
EV Phase-In Rate tariffs should be updated to ensure that the EV Phase-In Rates apply directly
to customers’ EV charging load through the use of EVSE- or EV-based submeters.
Additionally, VGIC appreciates the Upstate Utilities’ plans to allow participants in the
CMCP to simultaneously participate in the EV Phase-In Rate as well as commercial demand
response programs.1 Dual participation will ensure that fleets and other commercial charging
sites are compensated for the full value of managed charging, and potentially vehicle-to-grid
(“V2G”) exports. VGIC agrees with the Upstate Utilities that additional information is needed to
ensure that dual participation does not provide duplicate incentives for the same value or activity.
As such, VGIC recommends that the utilities conduct further stakeholder engagement (such as
through a workshop) in order to align these offerings.
VGIC Recommends Modifications to the Upstate Utilities’ Proposed CMCP
While VGIC supports the Joint Utilities’ overall Near-Term Solutions proposals, the
following modifications to the Upstate Utilities’ CMCP would help improve the proposed
offerings:
• The Peak Avoidance kW calculation should be modified: National Grid, Central Hudson,
and NYSEG and RG&E all proposed to calculate the Peak Avoidance kW by subtracting
the maximum EVSE demand during the peak window from the maximum EVSE demand
during all hours of each month.2 However, for some EV charging sites, the maximum
EVSE demand during all hours may fluctuate month-to-month. This fluctuation can make
the incentives the program participant receives each month inconsistent and difficult to
predict even if the program participant consistently manages their load during the peak
window. In order to provide predictable incentive payments that better inform customers’
load management choices, the Peak Avoidance kW should instead be calculated by
subtracting the maximum EVSE demand during the peak window from the maximum
simultaneous EVSE charging capacity (the lesser of the sum of EVSE nameplate capacity
and the maximum load of any load limiting hardware). This modification would make the
Upstate Utilities’ CMCP consistent with the Downstate Utilities’ CMCP3 as well as with
1 National Grid CMCP Implementation Plan, pg. 2; Central Hudson CMCP Implementation Plan, pg. 4; NYSEG and
RG&E CMCP Implementation Plan, pg. 7.
2 National Grid CMCP IP, pg. 2; Central Hudson CMCP IP, pg. 4; NYSEG and RG&E CMCP IP, pg. 8.
3 Joint Utilities Immediate Solutions Program Design, pg. 5. March 20, 2023.

the Commission January Order, which states that the Peak Avoidance Incentive should be
set “based on the difference between a charger’s charging capability in kW and the
maximum charging demand served by that charger during a defined peak period.”4
• Central Hudson and NYSEG and RG&E should allow customers to participate using
EVSE data: Unlike National Grid, which proposed to allow customers to participate in
the CMCP with utility interval meter or EVSE data, Central Hudson and NYSEG and
RG&E proposed to require participants to install an interval meter. For customers with
EVSE load co-mingled with other on-site load, Central Hudson and NYSEG and RG&E
proposed to only allow participation for customers with a maximum EVSE charging
capacity of at least 50% of the maximum site demand. These requirements would place
unnecessary cost and time burdens on some customers while completely preventing other
customers from participating in the CMCP altogether. VGIC strongly recommends that
Central Hudson and NYSEG and RG&E follow National Grid’s eligibility and data
collection requirements and allow customers to participate using EVSE data. This change
would facilitate greater customer participation in the CMCP, not only benefiting the grid
through increased load management but also supporting charging infrastructure
deployment and EV adoption.
• The Upstate Utilities should collect additional data points reporting purposes: VGIC
recommends two additional data points the utilities should collect: 1) participants’
average maximum demand kW during the peak window, and 2) participants’ average
maximum simultaneous EVSE charging capacity kW. These two data points represent the
two components of the Peak Avoidance kW as discussed above and would help enable an
assessment of the CMCP’s effectiveness in incentivizing peak avoidance.
Conclusion
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments and looks forward to
working with the Joint Utilities, the Commission, and other stakeholders to ensure the success of
New York’s transportation electrification efforts.
Respectfully submitted,
Ed Burgess
Senior Policy Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
4 Order Establishing Framework for Alternatives to Traditional Demand-Based Rate Structures, pg. 18.

vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
(510) 665-7811
www.vgicouncil.org