November 14, 2023
CPUC Energy Division Tariff Unit
505 Van Ness Avenue
San Francisco, California 94102
EDTariffUnit@cpuc.ca.gov
Re: Comments of the Vehicle Grid Integration Council to Resolution E-5300:
Approval, with Modification, of San Diego Gas and Electric Company’s
Near-Term Priority Proposal for Transportation Electrification Advisory
Services Program Pursuant to Decision 21-07-028.
Dear Sir or Madam:
Pursuant to the provisions of General Order 96-B and Comment Letter E-5300 circulated on
October 25, 2023, the Vehicle Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) hereby submits comments to the
above-referenced Draft Resolution E-5300 Approving, with Modifications, San Diego Gas and
Electric Company’s (“SDG&E”) Near-Term Priority Proposal for Transportation Electrification
Advisory Services Program Pursuant to Decision 21-07-028 (“Draft Resolution”).
VGIC generally supports the adoption of SDG&E’s proposed transportation electrification (“TE”)
advisory services program. VGIC believes more TE and fleet advisory services are critical to
advancing vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”) and transportation decarbonization.
In response to SDG&E’s Advice Letter 4233-E, VGIC recommended that SDG&E develop a
program element to:
“…not only educate customers on ALM solutions but also conduct site assessments to
recommend ALM solutions to a customer when it would be most beneficial to save on
infrastructure costs while still meeting customer mobility needs.”1
In its response, VGIC also notes that customers should be allowed to decide whether to implement
an ALM solution in exchange for cost reductions or non-monetary benefits (i.e., backup power
through a co-located energy storage system). If a site host decides to elect an ALM solution, they
must also be free to choose which customer-side ALM technology they would like to install and use.
In the Draft Resolution, the Commission states this strategy is “premature,” stating:
1 Response of VGIC to AL 4233-E of SDG&E: Near-Term Priority Proposal for TE Advisory Services Program
Pursuant to D.21-07-028. June 20, 2023. Page 2. Available at: https://www.vgicouncil.org/s/VGICs-
Response-to-SDGE-TE-Advisory-Services-AL-4233-E.pdf
1

November 14, 2023
Page 2 of 3
“D.22-11-040 requires the CPUC, with support from its Technical Consultant, to conduct a
study to assess ALM strategies and product offerings, barriers, equity impacts, and costs to
inform FC1 program implementation. We find that this work authorized in D.22-11-040 is
the appropriate venue to address this question and it is not appropriate to require SDG&E to
develop an ALM site assessment methodology for TEAS.”2
VGIC appreciates the CPUC and Technical Consultant's efforts to assess ALM formally and
holistically. However, we are concerned that the pace of this assessment is out of step with the real-
world experience of today’s customers and installers. Simply put, the demand from site hosts for the
deployment of new EV charging stations is outstripping California utilities’ ability to approve and
construct new infrastructure. Promoting ALM strategies can result in the faster deployment of EV
charging infrastructure across the state while triggering fewer new distribution system infrastructure
upgrades. ALM, therefore, represents a relief valve for the mounting energization timeline challenge.
VGIC clarifies that this is not a matter of pre-empting a future problem but rather of unlocking a
critical tool to address the growing backlog of sites that are categorically nudged toward new
infrastructure upgrades rather than considering how to use existing infrastructure as either an interim
or long-term solution.
Notably, the Commission has a long-standing, dedicated effort in Rulemaking (“R.”) 18-12-006
(“DRIVE OIR”) specifically to address the lengthy energization timelines for EV charging
infrastructure at large. On October 30, 2023, the investor-owned utilities (“IOUs”) filed its Joint
IOU Report on the EV Infrastructure Service Energization Workshop (“Energization Workshop
Report”), which states, “SDG&E explained that everyone needs capacity right now.”3 VGIC
believes SDG&E could address this problem through an ALM promotion strategy that extends
beyond mere education and instead works with customers to understand how each site could benefit
from ALM in both monetary and non-monetary terms.
In addition to the urgent matter of energization timelines highlighted in Resolution E-5247 and the
Energization Workshop Report, VGIC notes a growing cost imperative to pursue ALM through
SDG&E’s proposed TEAS program earnestly. Cal Advocates recently developed the Distribution
Grid Electrification Model (“DGEM”) study and report. The DGEM and Kevala’s Electrification
Impacts Study Part 1 (“EIS”), taken together, underscore one simple, immutable fact: if
California does not promote the spectrum of VGI strategies at its disposal, EV charging will
remain the largest factor in determining future electrification costs. The DGEM study found
that distribution system investments required to support high electrification through 2035 can be
cut in half primarily through the use of EV load management strategies like ALM. Senate Bill
(“SB”) 676 and the VGI Strategies Implementation Decision (“D.”) 20-12-029 establish drivers
2 Draft Resolution E-5300. Page 19.
3 Compliance Filing of SCE, SDG&E, PG&E, Bear Valley Electric Service, CalPeco Electric, and Pacificorp
Pursuant to OP 6 in Resolution E-5247 and E-Mail Ruling Setting Workshop on EV Charging Infrastructure
Service Energization Process. October 30, 2023. Page 15.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M520/K650/520650614.PDF
2

November 14, 2023
Page 3 of 3
for the Commission to advance ALM. However, the comparative findings of EIS and DGEM
establish an abundantly clear $25 billion imperative for the Commission to direct SDG&E to
conduct ALM site assessments to reduce the financial burden associated with transportation
electrification on ratepayers.
While EV service providers (e.g., EV fleet management companies) already conduct these
assessments with their customers, the Commission should direct SDG&E to augment these
assessments with data related to utility-side infrastructure. VGIC strongly recommends that the
Commission revise the Draft Resolution to direct SDG&E to develop and incorporate a standard
methodology for ALM site assessment in the TEAS program. As part of this site assessment,
SDG&E can calculate avoided costs, determining the value of avoiding or deferring a given
infrastructure upgrade.
I. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit these comments on the Draft Resolution and
looks forward to collaborating with the Commission and stakeholders in this proceeding.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Senior Policy Manager
VEHICLE GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
cc: Greg Anderson Regulatory Tariff Manager (SDGETariffs@sdge.com)
Emily Clayton, Energy Division (Emily.Clayton@cpuc.ca.gov)
Paula Gruendling, Energy Division (Paula.Gruendling@cpuc.ca.gov)
Service list R.18-12-006
3