DOCKETED
Docket Number: 22-RENEW-01
Project Title: Reliability Reserve Incentive Programs
TN #: 253700
Vehicle Grid Integration Council (VGIC) Comments on DSGS
Document Title:
Enhancements for Vehicle-to-Everything Systems
Description: N/A
Filer: System
Organization: Vehicle Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
Submitter Role: Public
Submission Date: 12/20/2023 6:10:40 PM
Docketed Date: 12/21/2023

Comment Received From: Vehicle Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
Submitted On: 12/20/2023
Docket Number: 22-RENEW-01
Comments of VGIC on DSGS Enhancements for Vehicle-to-
Everything Systems
Additional submitted attachment is included below.

December 20, 2023
Email to: docket@energy.ca.gov
Docket Number: 22-RENEW-01
Subject: California Energy Commission Demand Side Grid Support Program Guidelines
Re: Comments of the Vehicle Grid Integration Council to Enhance the Demand
Side Grid Support Program to Unlock Greater EV Participation
Dear Sir or Madam:
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)1 appreciates the opportunity to provide these
comments – an informal proposal on the California Energy Commission’s (CEC) Demand Side Grid
Support (DSGS) Program Guidelines.2 The DSGS program can unlock significant load reductions
and exports to support system reliability, including during extreme weather events, from California’s
1.5 million – and counting – EVs. EVs represent a low-cost resource to meet the state’s Strategic
Reliability Reserves that can be deployed at scale and rapidly relative to other resources. However,
to achieve this vision, the DSGS program should be enhanced to address key program design gaps
to enable EV customer participation.
Proposal: Establish a new “Option 4” based on Option 3 to Target V2X Discharge.
The CEC has been a national leader in advancing bidirectional charging technologies
through several significant grant funding opportunities, developing and maintaining the V2G
equipment list, and leading efforts to support interoperability. Yet, programs in other regions offer
far more attractive compensation mechanisms for grid-tied bidirectional charging.3 Meanwhile,
DSGS Option 3 offers a compelling and straightforward ongoing compensation mechanism for
behind-the-meter stationary energy storage systems that VGIC believes could be easily replicated
for bidirectional charging. Bidirectional chargers are mobile energy storage systems that are
operationally similar to stationary energy storage systems, which means replicating the structure
and provisions of Option 3 would be a good fit for V2X solutions.4 With over 1.5 million EVs sold
1 The Vehicle Grid Integration Council is a 501(c)(6) membership-based trade association representing over 40
companies focused on accelerating the role of smart electric vehicle (“EV”) charging and discharging through policy
development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to a decarbonized transportation and
electric sector by ensuring the value from flexible EV charging and discharging is recognized and compensated.
2 CEC DSGS Guidelines, Demand Side Grid Support Program Guidelines, Second Edition. July 26, 2023.
3 For example, the Connected Solutions Program offered by utilities in Massachusetts, Connecticut, and
Rhode Island can offer ~$200/kW-season for ~50 events per season lasting 2-3 hours, with some instances
of even higher compensation and number of events, depending on the utility. See:
https://www.nationalgridus.com/MA-Business/Energy-Saving-Programs/ConnectedSolutions
4 In 2020, the CPUC confirmed that, for the purposes of interconnection, V2X-DC chargers are energy
storage.

December 20, 2023
Page 2 of 3
in California, including 35,000 V2X-capable Nissan LEAFs, tens of thousands of V2X-capable Ford
F-150 Lightnings,5 and hundreds of V2X-capable electric school buses from manufacturers like
Blue Bird, Lion Electric, and Thomas Built, the stage is set to tap into an immense amount of latent
mobile energy storage capacity. However, this will not happen overnight and will require additional
market transition support through both incentives for bidirectional charging equipment and
compensation for V2X discharging, including through the DSGS program.
VGIC recommends that the CEC establish a new DSGS “Option 4” closely modeled on
Option 3 but open to bidirectional chargers instead of stationary batteries. This “low-hanging
fruit” enhancement can squeeze additional emergency net load reduction out of existing and new
customer EV energy storage resources without significant program guideline redesign. See
Attachment A detailing DSGS Program Guidelines – Option 3 provisions that would need to be
altered in the new Option 4. All other Option 3 provisions not detailed in Attachment A can be
copied and pasted into the new Option 4.
Establishing a new “Option 4” would support the independent evaluation of stationary
energy storage technologies (i.e., Option 3 resources) and bidirectional charging equipment (i.e.,
Option 4 resources) and would ensure that any future revisions needed to support bidirectional
charger participation can be made easily without interfering with rules for stationary energy storage.
As with stationary energy storage in Option 3, we recommend that the CEC’s DSGS
administrator (i.e., Olivine) accept device-level data for the new Option 4. This device-level data
can come from either the EV or bidirectional charger.6 The customer/aggregator should elect a single
data stream to not seek compensation twice for the same kWh discharged.
Borrowing the core design of Option 3 to establish a new Option 4 specific to bidirectional
EVSE is an uncomplicated and high “bang-for-buck” revision to promote greater participation from
bidirectional charging resources in DSGS. VGIC looks forward to collaborating with the CEC and
other stakeholders on this initiative.
5 Note the V2X capability for commercially-available Ford F-150 Lightnings are currently limited to electrically
isolated vehicle-to-home backup power configurations.
6 Upon initial review of Olivine’s Option 3 Meter Data Format Requirements, it is not immediately clear that
revisions would need to be made to accommodate bidirectional chargers in the new Option 4. However,
VGIC is available to collaborate with stakeholders to better understand what revisions may be required.
https://dsgs.olivineinc.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/13/2023/10/Olivine-Technical-Guide-Interval-Data-
Format-v2.2-DSGS-Annotations.docx

December 20, 2023
Page 3 of 3
Important Note on Available Equipment and Request for CEC Coordination with CPUC.
Since vehicle-to-grid (V2G) exports would be encouraged under the above proposal, the
CEC should consider the interactions between DSGS, Rule 21 smart inverter requirements, and
available UL-certified bidirectional chargers. There are currently no bidirectional chargers certified
to UL 1741 SB, which is required by Rule 21 as of August 29, 2023. Based on our discussions with
manufacturers, UL 1741 SB certification for bidirectional chargers is – optimistically – over 18
months away. As a result, the CPUC has exempted bidirectional chargers participating in ELRP
and, by extension, PG&E’s VGI Pilots from all UL 1741 SA, SB, and any subsequent smart inverter
requirements that the CPUC may set. We urge the CEC to coordinate, to the extent feasible, with
the CPUC to extend this treatment to bidirectional chargers participating in DSGS, including Option
1 or any new Options that would deem V2G exports eligible. Without this exemption, many
bidirectional EVSE will become stranded assets when they are most needed and available to provide
grid flexibility services. DSGS represents a significant near-term opportunity to demonstrate the
potential for VGI to provide grid services at scale and be compensated for doing so, particularly for
customers of POUs and municipal utilities that are not eligible to participate in ELRP Subgroup
A.5/VGI Aggregators. We therefore urge the CEC to make note of the current state of the
bidirectional charger market and waive the UL1741-SB requirement and allow customers with UL
1741 and UL1741-SA certified V2G bidirectional chargers to participate in the DSGS program.
Conclusion.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments and looks forward to
collaborating with the CEC and other stakeholders in this docket.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Senior Policy Manager
Vehicle Grid Integration Council
Albert Tapia
Policy Analyst
Vehicle Grid Integration Council
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org

Attachment A:
All Option 3 provisions can be simply “copied-and-pasted” into a new Program Guidelines Chapter
for a new Option 4, except for the sections detailed below. VGIC has provided redlines to these
sections to demonstrate what the language could look like in a new Chapter dedicated to a new
Option 4: “V2X VPP”.
At Pg 7 – 2.D.1.e, a new 2.D.1.f would be created, copying all elements from 2.D.1.e except for:
 “Information on each participating site, including a unique identification number, legal
name of participant, contact name and title (if contact name is different from participant
name), service account address, phone number, UDC, nominal battery electric vehicle
supply equipment (EVSE) power rating (kW), nominal storage energy capacity (kWh), and
nominated duration (hours).
At Pg 21 – CHAPTER 5, all elements can be copied directly for the new Option 4 except for:
5.A:
 “Third-party battery V2X service providers, POUs, and CCAs are eligible to serve as VPP
aggregators.”
 “A V2X VPP may consist of bidirectional EVSE storage paired with net-energy metering
(NEM) solar or stand-alone storage bidirectional EVSE deployed with residential (bundled
or unbundled) or nonresidential (bundled or unbundled) customers or both.”
 “At a minimum, each individual customer site participating in a DSGS BTM storage V2X
VPP must:”
o “Have an operational stationary battery system capable of discharging at least 1 kW
for at least 2 hours bidirectional EVSE system capable of discharging at least 1 kW
for at least 2 hours.”
Pg 22:
 “At a minimum, to participate in DSGS as a BTM storage V2X VPP, each aggregation
must:”
 “Consist of storage V2X assets nominated for the same duration (number of hours, see
following section for details).”
C:
 Incentive payments shall be made to VPP aggregators based on the demonstrated battery
V2X capacity of an aggregated VPP. VPP aggregators shall allocate incentive payments
between the VPP aggregator and its participants pursuant to the terms and conditions
agreed to between the VPP aggregator and participant. Different levels of incentives for
capacity (kW) are available for VPPs of varying durations (hours). VPP aggregators shall
be eligible for a payment for demonstrated capacity at the rates defined in Table 2 based on
the capacity (kW) and duration (hours) demonstrated by the VPP aggregator in each
month.
Pg 24:

E:
 Hourly battery EVSE performance shall be determined by submeter or inverter-level
measured battery EVSE discharge, regardless of whether the energy serves BTM load or is
exported to the grid. For battery resources receiving self-generation incentive program
(SGIP) funding or with a host utility permission-to-operate date before July 1, 2023, an
hourly prescriptive baseline shall be applied to battery discharge:
Pg 25
 For all other batteries EVSE, the baseline is defined as zero kW.
Where … is the metered battery EVSE discharge (kW), … is the baseline, and …is the
day-ahead LMP, all in hour h.