BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 21-06-017
Modernize the Electric Grid for a High (Filed June 24, 2021)
Distributed Energy Resources Future.
REPLY COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON CAL
ADVOCATES’ DISTRIBUTION GRID ELECTRIFICATION MODEL STUDY AND
REPORT
Zach Woogen
Senior Policy Manager
Albert Tapia
Policy Analyst
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
10265 Rockingham Dr.
Suite #100-4061
Sacramento, California 95827
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
November 7, 2023

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 21-06-017
Modernize the Electric Grid for a High (Filed June 24, 2021)
Distributed Energy Resources Future.
REPLY COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON CAL
ADVOCATES’ DISTRIBUTION GRID ELECTRIFICATION MODEL STUDY AND
REPORT
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) hereby submits
these reply comments on the Administrative Law Judges’ Ruling Soliciting Comments on Cal
Advocates’ Distribution Grid Electrification Model Study and Report (“Ruling”), issued by
Administrative Law Judge (“ALJ”) Manisha Lakhanpal and Kelly A. Hymes on October 17,
2023.
VGIC commends Cal Advocates' for its development of the Distribution Grid
Electrification Model (“DGEM”) study and report. As stated by Southern California Edison
Company (“SCE”) in opening comments, the DGEM and Kevala’s Electrification Impacts Study
Part 1 (“EIS”), taken together, “illustrate the complexity of projecting distribution system
investments required to support high electrification through 2035.”1 However, both studies
underscore one simple, immutable fact: when and how EV charging occurs remains the
largest factor in determining future electrification costs. The DGEM study found that
distribution system investments required to support high electrification through 2035 can be cut
1 Opening Comments of SCE, pg. 1.
1

in half primarily through the use of EV load management strategies. We believe there are even
greater cost saving opportunities from bidirectional charging and Vehicle-to-Grid (“V2G”)
solutions. Senate Bill (“SB”) 676 and the VGI Strategies Implementation Decision (“D.”) 20-12-
029 establish drivers for the Commission to advance VGI solutions and transition the VGI
technology market from demonstrations and pilots to full-scale, sustainable commercialization.
However, the comparative findings of EIS and DGEM establish an abundantly clear $25 billion
core imperative for the Commission to develop and enact a comprehensive VGI strategy to
reduce the financial burden associated with transportation electrification on ratepayers.
Within the EIS and DGEM context of distribution system investments, VGIC makes the
following key recommendations for unlocking latent EV load flexibility and export capability to
support the potential $25 billion cost savings opportunity:
• Direct IOUs to establish EV distribution load optimization programs. A
recent IEEE case study indicates how coordinated distribution system EV load
optimization differs from California’s current patchwork of EV load management
strategies, which rely on traditional demand response, TOU rates, and emerging
RTP pricing based solely on system conditions:2
2 Utility Planning for Distribution-Optimized Electric Vehicle Charging. Matthew Mills, Manasseh Obi,
Kendall Cody, Kyle Garton, Amanda Myers Wisser, and Sammy Nabahani. October 19, 2023. IEEE
Power & Energy Magazine.
2

This data demonstrates the potential impacts of EV load management programs
that target bulk system benefits (“Figure 3” above) compared to those that
consider distribution load constraints (“Figure 6” above). In both cases, the
system peak is reduced, but only in the distribution constraint case is the EV
charging load kept below the distribution asset limit. Although California leads
the nation in EV deployments, VGIC is unaware of any instances where the
Commission has authorized a single IOU EV program that promotes distribution
system EV load optimization. In recognition of EV-related distribution
infrastructure costs causing the immense discrepancy between the DGEM and EIS
cost studies, VGIC recommends the Commission direct IOUs to establish
distribution system EV load optimization programs. At a minimum, VGIC
respectfully urges the Commission to indicate in which proceeding, Advice
Letter, or other procedural vehicle the IOUs should request approval for such a
program, as it is unclear where an EV distribution load optimization program
should be offered. Without the Commission's direction to establish these
programs, California will steer toward the EIS outcome rather than the DGEM
3

impact, costing ratepayers an additional $25 billion in distribution system
investments that can be avoided.
• Approve proposed EV distribution value adders/subtractors in emerging
dynamic rate options, and direct IOUs to introduce new distribution
components where relevant. The Demand Flexibility Rulemaking (“R.”) 22-07-
005 contemplates near-term proposals for expanding existing real-time pricing
rate pilots and long-term proposals for the demand flexibility rate design guidance
for IOUs. In both cases, there are several instances where dynamic distribution
price components are incorporated, including in PG&E’s existing AgFIT Pilot
and in SCE’s RATES TeMix Pilot. Other emerging RTP rates and pilots do not
incorporate dynamic distribution components, including PG&E’s Commercial EV
DAHRTP rate and SDG&E’s Export Compensation Pilot approved in D.23-11-
006. VGIC considers both dynamic rates and the nonrate programs referenced
above important levers to unleashing EV load flexibility to offset distribution
upgrade costs. As demonstrated by the 2020 VGI Working Group Final Report,
there are thousands of VGI use cases, which means a one-size-fits-all approach to
recruiting and maintaining customer engagement is unlikely to be feasible. With
this in mind, VGIC recommends the Commission direct IOUs in R.22-07-005 to
update all emerging and proposed dynamic import and export rates to incorporate
dynamic distribution components as a means to support a path that captures the
$25 billion in savings indicated by the DGEM findings compared to the EIS
results.
4

• Establish a clear framework and loading order guiding the use of automated
load management solutions, including power sharing software and storage-
backed charging, and critically evaluating existing make-ready
incentives/tariffs within the context of ALM. While PG&E has reported
utilizing automated load management (“ALM”) solutions to mitigate up to
$200,000 in infrastructure upgrades per site, the Commission remains without a
clear framework on how to utilize ALM to mitigate distribution infrastructure
upgrades at the time of site design and construction.3 The rates and nonrate
programs referenced above can support ongoing distribution optimization to defer
and avoid distribution system upgrades generally, however, ALM solutions can
defer and avoid upgrades triggered by specific EVSE deployments. Critically,
customers should never be required to implement ALM solutions, nor should they
be steered toward ALM solutions if it is not well-suited for their site. However,
ALM should be an option for customers who, after receiving education on the
topic, elect to implement these solutions. Today, the Commission’s policy and, as
a result, the IOUs implementation of EV infrastructure deployment promote new
distribution infrastructure upgrades at the time of construction. For example, the
IOU make-ready programs and the EV Infrastructure Rules 29/45 nudge
customers onto new service drops and separate meters as a condition of
participation. While new infrastructure will surely be required to advance
California’s overall TE goals, VGIC believes that customers should be given the
3 See Appendix D of D.20-12-029 “PG&E Electric Vehicle Infrastructure OIR Rulemaking 18-12-006
Data Response” https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Published/G000/M356/K212/356212163.pdf
5

choice to utilize ALM solutions to mitigate distribution impacts if they would like
to. In some cases, including the PG&E example cited above, utilities may allow
the use of an ALM solution, while in other cases, customers seeking to leverage
an ALM solution may be turned away while being informed that the service
connection request may not be processed for several years. Customer marketing,
education, and outreach within existing TE programs and Rule 29/45 websites do
not mention, explain, or share any information about ALM solutions when they
may be permitted, and the customer benefits (i.e., reduced service connection
time). Without remedy, the existing paradigm locks in future grid costs that lean
much closer to the EIS study than the DGEM study results, potentially triggering
an additional $25 billion in ratepayer burden. VGIC reiterates that new
infrastructure will be needed to advance TE, and that ALM alone will not solve
all of the EV deployment infrastructure challenges facing California. However,
VGIC urges the Commission to take action in this proceeding to promote flexible
service connections – and export interconnections – that use software- or
hardware-based solutions to allow for customers to choose to construct EV
charging equipment that exceeds the electrical capacity at a given site in
nameplate but not in operation, including the accommodation of bidirectional
charging. Promotion of ALM could include (1) establishing a flexible service
connection tariff, (2) revising to Rules 2, 15/16, 29/45, and/or other Rules that
define and assess load shapes, (3) incorporating ALM marketing, education, and
outreach into make-ready programs and tariffs, (4) establishing a shared savings
model to ensure IOUs are appropriately incentivized to reduce grid connection
6

size and/or install EVSE on existing service drops, and/or (5) a clear loading order
for utilities to use before upgrading distribution grid at sites, namely looking at
whether ALM use at the site would avoid or reduce infrastructure upgrades.
• Ensure that California’s cost-effectiveness and evaluation frameworks are
appropriately capturing distribution value. It is expected that the current
Avoided Cost Calculator (ACC) does not capture the vast majority of distribution
value derived from load management programs.4 Undervaluing distribution-
focused load management deters the existence and expansion of load management
programs, like those referenced above, that can ultimately reduce costs for
ratepayers. Unfortunately, the Avoided Transmission and Distribution Cost Study
was not completed in time to be incorporated into the 2024 ACC Update.5
Looking forward, we recommend that the Study be completed in a timely fashion
and incorporated into the ACC as soon as possible, potentially in an interim ACC
update before the 2026 update cycle. Moreover, we recommend that the
Commission consider this gap in benefits measurement when it is in the process
of determining which pilots and programs may be approved, particularly on the
grounds of cost-effectiveness, for example in the recent Proposed Decision
(“PD”) in A.22-05-002, et al., which proposes declining SDG&E’s proposed EV
DR Pilot on these grounds.
4 D.22-05-002 Adopting Changes to the Avoided Cost Calculator.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Published/G000/M474/K624/474624547.PDF
5 Integrated Distributed Energy Resource (IDER) 2024 Avoided Cost Calculator Staff Proposal –
Addendum. Pg. 20. https://webproda.cpuc.ca.gov/-/media/cpuc-website/divisions/energy-
division/documents/energy-efficiency/ider-cost-effectiveness/2024-acc-staff-proposal-with-addendum.pdf
7

VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit these reply comments on the DGEM Study and
Report. We look forward to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this
initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Senior Policy Manager
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: November 7, 2023
8