STATE OF MICHIGAN
BEFORE THE MICHIGAN PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION
In the matter of the application of DTE Case No. U-21482
ELECTRIC COMPANY for approval of
interconnection procedures and waivers from
Interconnection and Distributed Generation
Standards R 460.901a et seq.
REPLY COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON
INTERCONNECTION PROCEDURES AND DISTRIBUTED GENERATION
STANDARDS
I. INTRODUCTION.
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) is a 501(c)(6) nonprofit member-based
association focused on accelerating the role of smart electric vehicle (“EV”) charging and
discharging (i.e., vehicle-grid integration or “VGI”) through policy development, education,
outreach, and research.1 Scaling VGI is an essential component of transportation electrification
and will help accomplish the following key policy goals:
• Benefit drivers and fleet owners by reducing the total cost of ownership and providing
additional value streams like backup power.
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., BorgWarner, Enel
X North America, Inc., Fermata Energy, Ford Motor Company, General Motors, Nissan Group of North
America, Nuvve Holding Corporation, Stellantis N.V., Toyota Motor North America, Blue Grid, BP
Pulse, Customized Energy Solutions, dcbel, Emporia, EnergyHub, Enphase, EV.Energy, FlexCharging,
FLO EV Charging, FreeWire Technologies, Inc., Gridwiz, Hoosier Energy, Innovation Core
SEI, IoTecha, Kaluza, Kitu Systems, Landis+Gyr, NineDot Energy, Peak Power, QCells, Sacramento
Municipal Utility District, Sunrun, Synop, The Mobility House, Inc., Utilidata, Veloce Energy, Inc.,
Wallbox USA Inc., and WeaveGrid. The views expressed in these comments are those of VGIC, and do
not necessarily reflect the views of all individual VGIC member companies or
supporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/).
1

• Decarbonize the transportation sector by accelerating EV adoption through unlocking
additional benefits to EV drivers and fleet owners.
• Support the evolving electric grid by providing essential grid services as intermittent
energy generation and distributed energy resource penetration increases.
• Increase affordability by placing downward pressure on rates, in turn reducing
electricity bills for all customers.
• Improve community resiliency and security during planned and unplanned grid
outages.
• Foster economic activity through innovation, competition, and market transformation.
With the proper utility policy and regulatory support and coordination, these goals can be
achieved, and EV drivers and fleets in Michigan can play a critical role in accelerating both
transportation electrification and grid transition. Our vision for VGI encompasses the
following key elements:
• Ensure customer mobility needs are satisfied: Drivers and fleets can support the grid
without compromising their mobility needs.
• Managed charging will benefit EV drivers and fleet operators: Drivers and fleets in
Michigan will be provided a menu of opportunities to align charging with the times of
day when electricity prices are low, reducing EV and fleet operating costs by as much as
50% compared to unmanaged charging. Lowering the total cost of EV ownership will
accelerate overall EV adoption by drivers and fleets in Michigan.
• EVs provide reliable emergency power during blackouts: During extreme weather
blackouts or other power outages, EV drivers and fleets can utilize bidirectional charging
2

capabilities to send energy to a home, building, or microgrid, serving as a generator and
providing safe backup power for households and communities.
• Charging infrastructure deployment accelerates: Smarter management of EV charging
can help accelerate the deployment of EV charging infrastructure, encouraging wider
access to EV charging.
• VGI enables EVs to provide valuable services to the grid and generate revenue:
V1G managed charging (unidirectional charging) and V2X (vehicle-to-everything
bidirectional charging) will enable electric vehicles to both receive and feed power back
to the grid, providing grid services such as demand response, peak shaving, frequency
regulation, and more. A number of utilities across the US have implemented programs
that provide compensation for these valuable grid services.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide the following recommendations on Michigan’s
draft interconnection procedures (“MIXDG Procedures”).
II. VGIC RECOMMENDS THE COMMISSION CONSIDER THE V2X
BIDIRECTIONAL CHARGING SYSTEMS BEST PRACTICES FOR SERVICE
CONNECTION OR INTERCONNECTION FOUND IN ATTACHMENT A
BELOW.
Since its founding 2020, VGIC has worked with its members, in coordination with
policymakers, utilities, and other stakeholders, to develop best practices for VGI market
development. In 2022, VGIC commenced a special initiative to socialize best practices for the
utility service connection/energization (load) or interconnection (generation) of vehicle-to-
everything (“V2X”) bidirectional charging systems. As part of this effort, VGIC consulted with
dozens of utility distribution engineers and interconnection teams, specialists in interconnection
(e.g., Interstate Renewable Energy Council or “IREC”), and solution providers to “ground-truth”
3

a series of best practices and recommendations. The resulting findings can be found below in
Attachment A, V2X Bidirectional Charging Systems Best Practices for Service Connection or
Interconnection. VGIC respectfully requests that the Commission and its regulated utilities
consider incorporating these best practices into the MIXDG and any subsequent efforts related to
service connection or interconnection for EV chargers or energy storage systems.
III. CONCLUSION
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit these reply comments on the Interconnection
Procedures and Distributed Generation Standards. We look forward to further collaboration with
the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Senior Policy Manager
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
10265 Rockingham Dr.
Suite #100-4061
Sacramento, California 95827
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
Date: November 13, 2023
4

Appendix A
V2X Bidirectional Charging Systems Best Practices for Service Connection or Interconnection
Vehicle Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
August 2022
Available at: https://www.vgicouncil.org/s/VGIC-Special-Initiative-2022.pdf
5