February 17, 2023
Email to: docket@energy.ca.gov
Docket Number: 22-RENEW-01
Subject: Lead Commissioner Workshop on Demand Side Grid Support Program and Distributed
Electricity Backup Assets Program
Re: Comments of the Vehicle Grid Integration Council on Demand Side Grid
Support and Distributed Electricity Backup Assets Program Workshop
Dear Sir or Madam:
The Vehicle Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) appreciates the opportunity to comment on
the Lead Commissioner Workshop on the Demand Side Grid Support (“DSGS”) Program and
Distributed Electricity Backup Assets (“DEBA”) Program Workshop (“Workshop”) held on January
27, 2023. VGIC commends the California Energy Commission (“CEC”) for its efforts to bolster
grid reliability in the face of increased risk of extreme weather events.
I. INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY.
The Vehicle Grid Integration Council is a 501(c)(6) membership-based trade association
representing over 30 companies focused on accelerating the role of smart electric vehicle (“EV”)
charging and discharging through policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC
supports the transition to a decarbonized transportation and electric sector by ensuring the value
from EV deployments and flexible EV charging and discharging is recognized and compensated in
support of a more reliable, affordable, and efficient electric grid.
VGIC strongly believes the DEBA and DSGS programs are needed to unlock real-world
load reductions and exports that will meaningfully support grid reliability. To accomplish these
goals, each program must fill key gaps in policy and funding support. With this in mind, VGIC
offers the below overarching recommendations to the CEC:
 DEBA program should transition toward a $1,000/kW incentive program rather than
using a Grant Funding Opportunity (“GFO”) approach to project selection and fund
distribution.
 DEBA eligibility should include both bidirectional EV chargers and storage-backed
managed charging.
 DSGS aggregators should be able to enroll directly in the program rather than going
through a load-serving entity (“LSE”).

February 17, 2023
Page 2 of 6
 CEC should establish a pathway to participating in DSGS using both EV charger
submetering and onboard vehicle telematics.
 DSGS Option 3 should include an out-of-market participation pathway that eliminates
baselining.
II. DEBA PROGRAM SHOULD TRANSITION TOWARD A $1,000/KW INCENTIVE
PROGRAM RATHER THAN USING A GRANT FUNDING OPPORTUNITY
(“GFO”) APPROACH TO PROJECT SELECTION AND FUND DISTRIBUTION.
Despite the rapid expansion of available products and the potential grid capacity that could
be unlocked by EVs, the deployment of bidirectional charging equipment, storage-backed managed
charging configurations, and other VGI solutions remain nascent due partially to the higher upfront
installation costs relative to non-VGI charging solutions. Because these solutions are new, they do
not fall neatly into existing incentive programs for EV chargers or energy storage. This presents a
clear policy gap and bottleneck for the bidirectional charging market. VGIC understands the CEC’s
intent to quickly distribute an initial round of funding to DERs and acknowledges that a GFO offers
an existing framework that is relatively easy to implement for the CEC and its staff. However, VGIC
believes the DEBA program would be far more effective if structured as a standard incentive
program offering that maximizes transparency and certainty for participants while minimizing their
administrative burden.
The CEC should offer a transparent $1,000/kW incentive to support constructing these
critical distributed grid resources. This would send a clear market signal to vehicle and charger
manufacturers that have not yet begun offering bidirectional charging and other VGI products to do
so, thereby expanding customer choice and placing downward pressure on the future costs of this
equipment. While cost data for the purchase and installation of today’s bidirectional charging
equipment is limited, VGIC reiterates its recommendation for a flat $1,000/kW bidirectional and
storage-backed charging equipment incentive to unlock new gigawatt-scale distributed energy
storage capacity that will be embedded in California’s on-road EVs in the coming years. The CEC
should establish a MW goal for the deployment of bidirectional charging infrastructure. If
deployments do not track the goal, incentives could be adjusted to provide the necessary level of
investment in bidirectional charging infrastructure.
To reduce administrative burden, VGIC recommends the flat $1,000/kW incentive be made
available on a rolling basis to aggregators for aggregations greater than 25 kW, rather than to
individual projects.1 Additionally, the incentive should accommodate the addition of customers that
enter the aggregation later. Furthermore, the minimum aggregation size should be 25 kW, to align
with the Emergency Load Reduction Program’s (“ELRP”) Vehicle Grid Integration (“VGI”)
Aggregation Pilot. This alignment is important, given that VGIC anticipates many customers that
receive DEBA funds will participate in ELRP to provide emergency capacity.
1 The 25 kW minimum aggregation size aligns with the Emergency Load Reduction Program’s VGI Pilot.

February 17, 2023
Page 3 of 6
Given the lack of interoperability today between EVs and bidirectional charging stations, an
incentive for a bidirectional charging station may not guarantee pairing with a bidirectionally
capable EV and, thus, the inability to provide on-call emergency grid services. The recipient of the
incentive should be required to attest that they will pair the bidirectional charging station with
compatible V2X-enabled EVs and participate in one ELRP, DSGS, or another program deemed
eligible for DEBA incentives. Note, this does not preclude other requirements that bidirectional
charging stations are standards-ready (e.g., ISO 15118-20) to be prepared for the future with more
robust V2X interoperability in the not-too-distant future.
Lastly, VGIC notes that bidirectional chargers and associated equipment, like automated
transfer switches and meter-socket-based devices, could be used to safely island a customer’s load
from the grid to establish a microgrid. The creation of this microgrid could in turn support the grid
during extreme heat events or other tight reliability conditions by reducing load on the grid.
Therefore, in addition to V2G export solutions, these islanding configurations should also be eligible
for the simple $1,000/kW incentive.
III. DEBA ELIGIBILITY SHOULD INCLUDE BOTH BIDIRECTIONAL EV
CHARGING AND STORAGE-BACKED MANAGED CHARGING EQUIPMENT.
VGIC appreciates the CEC’s inclusion of VGI resources in its proposed DEBA eligibility.
However, VGIC encourages the CEC to also consider the attributes of storage-backed managed
charging. Storage-backed managed charging utilizes stationary energy storage co-located or
integrated with an EV charger to buffer charging sessions and flatten a site’s peak load. This
approach is currently in use at public Direct Current Fast Charger (“DCFC”) sites as well as fleet
depots which otherwise may have had limited ability to reduce peak demand given the expectations
of those drivers and fleets. While public DCFC is not typically considered a candidate use case for
managed charging, utilizing a co-located or integrated stationary energy storage system can
transform these sites into more flexible load management assets. Moreover, this storage-backed
configuration can also support charger reliability and uptime by providing backup power during grid
outages. Lastly, these sites can significantly reduce costs for grid upgrades in some cases, for
example by deferring or avoiding transformer and other secondary distribution system upgrades,
which in turn helps protect utility ratepayers from the rising costs of transportation electrification
related utility infrastructure. Example commercial implementations of this configuration include
recent installations from Electrify America2 and FreeWire Technologies3.
Despite these many benefits, this configuration is not currently promoted or incentivized
through CEC or utility programs and is under-deployed in California. VGIC believes adoption has
been hampered due to the lack of promotion or incentive to elect these options, despite their apparent
benefits. Namely, utility-side infrastructure upgrade costs are typically socialized to all ratepayers,
leaving no reason for customers to choose these systems that can reduce system cost, help manage
load, provide benefits such as site backup power, and alleviate congestion in backlogged utility
2 See https://media.electrifyamerica.com/en-us/releases/199
3 See https://insideevs.com/news/613621/chevron-texaco-stations-freewire-chargers/

February 17, 2023
Page 4 of 6
service connection queues. VGIC believes that DEBA is an appropriate program to address this gap
and recommends that storage-backed managed charging (“V1G”)be eligible to receive the same
DEBA incentive open to V2B and V2G charging equipment, given its similar costs, use cases, and
customers.
IV. DSGS AGGREGATORS SHOULD BE ABLE TO ENROLL DIRECTLY IN THE
PROGRAM RATHER THAN GOING THROUGH A LOAD-SERVING ENTITY
(“LSE”).
During the January 27th Workshop, CEC staff shared a proposal to allow third-party
aggregators to enroll directly with the DSGS Program Administrator (either the CEC or another
PA). VGIC strongly supports this approach and believes DSGS aggregators can be instrumental in
maximizing the load reductions and DER exports unlocked through the program. Like ELRP or
other DER aggregator programs around the country, DSGs aggregators would be responsible for
enrolling customers and dispatching resources in response to an event or price signal.
Critically, DSGS is a taxpayer-funded CEC program, not a ratepayer-funded LSE program.
As such, VGIC strongly recommends the program be administered on a statewide basis, such that
DSGS Aggregators can enroll directly in the program rather than going through a LSE. One risk of
leaving it up to the LSE to offer DSGS is that publicly-owned utilities and other LSEs may be too
busy with their own internal goals and mandates to take on the additional workload required to offer
DSGS to their customers. Notably, CEC uses a statewide approach with third-party Program
Administrators for many other impactful programs, including CALeVIP and EnergIIZE. This
approach could also facilitate inter-territory aggregation, which could provide additional flexibility
and, in turn, further bolster reliability.
V. CEC SHOULD ESTABLISH A PATHWAY TO PARTICIPATING IN DSGS USING
BOTH EV CHARGER SUBMETERING AND ONBOARD VEHICLE
TELEMATICS.
While bidirectional charging holds great promise as a grid resource, VGIC urges the CEC to
consider the “low-hanging fruit” of unlocking greater load shift participation from EVs. VGIC
estimates another 250,000 EVs will be sold in the state by summer 2023, on top of the 1 million
already on California’s roads.4 Assuming an average charging load of only 5 kW per vehicle, this
represents a total technical potential of 6,250 MW in instantaneous load that could theoretically be
reduced via V1G. Obviously, the practical potential is only a small fraction of that since not all of
those devices will be charging during the critical net peak load hours of 6-9pm, and not all EV
owners will choose to participate in V1G activities. However, VGIC estimates that even under a
more reasonable participation rate of 5%, approximately 312 MW of net peak load reduction from
V1G might be achievable by the end of summer 2023.
4 CEC ZEV Sales Dashboard.

February 17, 2023
Page 5 of 6
Historically, customers with certain smart chargers have been able to participate in
California’s limited portfolio of smart charging pilots and programs. In December 2021, the
California Public Utilities Commission (“CPUC”) adopted Decision (“D.”) 21-12-015, which
established the EV/VGI Aggregation subgroup within the ELRP and, critically, detailed EVSE
submetering as an acceptable pathway to measure Incremental Load Reductions (“ILR”). In August
2022, the CPUC issued D.22-08-024 adopting an EVSE Submetering Protocol following nearly a
decade of testing and developing a robust record on the matter. This landmark decision establishes
standards for EVSE submetering data accuracy and testing to enable the widespread use of EVSE
submeters for billing purposes among California’s investor-owned utilities. With this in mind, VGIC
strongly recommends that the CEC follow suit by enabling customers to participate in DSGS using
EVSE submeters.
Meanwhile, the underlying tech needed to facilitate even greater participation in load shift
programs and rates is embedded in most EVs themselves via the onboard vehicle telematics
capabilities. Telematics-based pilots are increasing in number, for example, Sacramento Municipal
Utility District’s (“SMUD”) recently announced BMW/Ford/GM pilot, PG&E’s evPulse program,
and PG&E’s BMW ChargeForward pilot. However, the largest VGI pilot, ELRP, remains closed to
telematics-based load management, and no mass-market (i.e., non-pilot) VGI program utilizing
vehicle telematics have been proposed or established in California. By unlocking both smart
chargers and vehicle telematics participation pathways for DSGS, the CEC can address a critical
“missing link” in its load reduction capabilities.
VI. DSGS OPTION 3 SHOULD INCLUDE AN OUT-OF-MARKET PARTICIPATION
PATHWAY THAT ELIMINATES BASELINING.
VGIC strongly supports the inclusion of DSGS’s Option 3 payment option, which provides
capacity payments for committed DSGS capacity. However, the CEC’s current DSGS guidelines
require resources in Option 3 to enroll in the CAISO market as a Proxy Demand Response
(“PDR”) resource. As other parties have highlighted, such as the California Solar and Storage
Association ("CALSSA"), PDR does not compensate resources for any exported energy.5
Additionally, the logistics of enrolling in the wholesale market, such as the share-my-data process,
have also posed barriers, as highlighted by Sunrun and Leap. 6 VGIC believes that the CEC can
bolster participation in DSGS by including an out-of-market participation pathway for Option 3,
with dispatch triggers being based on wholesale market prices without the need for market
enrollment.
5 CALSSA DEBA DSGS program design proposal submitted on January 20, 2023 in CEC Docket No. 22-RENEW-01
at 1.
6 Sunrun and Leap Proposal - DER Program Design submitted on January 26, 2023 in in CEC Docket No. 22-RENEW-
01 at 3.

February 17, 2023
Page 6 of 6
VGIC also agrees with CALSSA’s proposal to eliminate baselining for these resources,
which will help to streamline program compensation and administration.7 As highlighted by the
CEC at the Workshop, payments to customers for 2022 DSGS events have yet to occur, and
removing the complexities surrounding baselining would likely help to streamline program
administration and payment. Lastly, the omission of baselines removes perverse incentives to not
dispatch resources on non-event days in order to create an optimal baseline.8
VII. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments on the workshop and looks
forward to collaborating with the CEC and other stakeholders in this docket.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Ed Burgess
Ed Burgess
Senior Policy Director
Vehicle Grid Integration Council
Zach Woogen
Senior Policy Manager
Vehicle Grid Integration Council
7 CALSSA DEBA DSGS program design proposal submitted on January 20, 2023 in CEC Docket No. 22-RENEW-01
at 8-9.
8 Ibid.