June 20, 2023
CPUC Energy Division Tariff Unit
505 Van Ness Avenue
San Francisco, California 94102
EDTariffUnit@cpuc.ca.gov
Re: Response of the Vehicle Grid Integration Council to Advice Letter 4233-E of
San Diego Gas and Electric Company: Near-Term Priority Proposal for
Transportation Electrification Advisory Services Program Pursuant to
Decision 21-07-028
Dear Sir or Madam:
Pursuant to the provisions of General Order 96-B, the Vehicle Grid Integration Council
(“VGIC”) hereby submits this response to the above-referenced Advice Letter 4233-E of San Diego
Gas and Electric Company (“SDG&E”), Near-Term Priority Proposal for Transportation
Electrification Advisory Services Program Pursuant to Decision 21-07-028 (“Advice Letter”) on
May 31, 2023.
VGIC commends SDG&E’s efforts in developing a thoughtful near-term priority proposal
focused on offering transportation electrification (“TE”) advisory services. VGIC believes more TE
and fleet advisory services are critical to advancing vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”) and
transportation decarbonization. As proposed, the TE Advisory Services (“TEAS”) program would
significantly increase the scope of SDG&E’s relationship with the electric vehicle (“EV”) owner or
operator. Learning from the last decade of TE infrastructure program applications, VGIC believes
the Commission must strike a careful balance when defining the role of the investor-owned utility
(“IOU”) in supporting TE while enabling third-party actors to engage with customers in a
competitive marketplace. A foundational principle in utility regulation is to avoid or limit monopoly
firms’ entry into the provision of services that can be provided through competitive markets.
In the case of the TEAS program, VGIC believes many of SDG&E’s proposed service
offerings are, in fact, appropriate for IOU implementation. However, VGIC is also concerned that
well-intentioned customer education efforts, if not implemented in an unbiased and transparent
manner, could ultimately result in “gatekeeping” that limits customer choice, hinders the market for
certain VGI solutions, and diminishes opportunities for competitive TE offerings from emerging.
With this in mind, VGIC provides additional context for the Commission’s consideration and
recommends that the Commission approve the Advice Letter with the below modifications.
1

June 20, 2023
Page 2 of 4
I. TO REMAIN CONSISTENT WITH RECENT COMMISSION GUIDANCE,
SDG&E SHOULD CLARIFY THAT ELIGIBLE AUTOMATED LOAD
MANAGEMENT SOLUTIONS INCLUDE BOTH SOFTWARE-BASED
SOLUTIONS AND CO-LOCATED ENERGY STORAGE TECHNOLOGIES.
The Advice Letter states that “The TEAS program will offer customized advisory services, planning,
education, and support to help customers take advantage of opportunities to electrify their fleet, as
well as to educate customers and operating costs, EVSE operation and maintenance, and ALM
strategies.”1 VGIC supports increased education and implementation of ALM, including both
software solutions optimizing power sharing across multiple chargers at a single point of connection
and co-located or integrated energy storage solutions. In either case, the goal is to avoid or defer
distribution capacity upgrades if a customer configures the solution to limit the site’s maximum
demand. Thus, both types of ALM solutions should be communicated to customers.
The Commission recently directed Pacific Gas and Electric Company (“PG&E”) to “not prohibit
the use of BTM storage or other hardware as acceptable ALM or load management solutions, as this
is an unnecessary constraint.”2 Although SDG&E’s Advice Letter does not preclude any specific
type of ALM technology from eligibility, it also does not explicitly define which ALM solutions
will be presented to customers. VGIC recommends SDG&E ensures customers receive education
about both software-based ALM (i.e., power sharing across multiple EV supply equipment or
“EVSE”) and hardware-based ALM (i.e., co-located and integrated energy storage) to promote
consistency with the Commission’s recent guidance on ALM.
II. TO REMAIN CONSISTENT WITH GUIDANCE IN DECISIONS 20-12-029 AND
22-12-054, THE COMMISSION SHOULD DIRECT SDG&E TO DEVELOP A
TECHNOLOGY-NEUTRAL STANDARD METHODOLOGY FOR ALM SITE
ASSESSMENT.
The TEAS program presents an opportunity for SDG&E to not only educate customers on ALM
solutions, but also conduct site assessments to recommend ALM solutions to a customer when it
would be most beneficial to save on infrastructure costs while still meeting customer mobility needs.
The landmark December 2020 VGI Strategies and SB 676 Implementation decision (D.20-12-029)
directed utilities “in all of its future applications for TE programs” to “describe its standard
evaluation criteria to determine host sites where ALM would benefit ratepayers by reducing costs
while meeting host site needs for electric vehicle charging.”3
1 Advice Letter at 15.
2 Decision Authorizing PG&E’s Electric Vehicle Charge 2 Program. Decision 22-12-054. December 19, 2022.
Page 54.
3 Decision Concerning Implementation of Senate Bill 676 and VGI Strategies. Decision 20-12-029. December
21, 2020. Ordering Paragraph 5. Page 79.
2

June 20, 2023
Page 3 of 4
EV service providers (e.g., EV fleet management companies) already conduct these assessments
with their customers. Through the TEAS program, SDG&E could augment these assessments with
data related to utility-side infrastructure. VGIC recommends that the Commission direct SDG&E to
develop and incorporate a technology-neutral standard methodology for ALM site assessment for
implementation in the TEAS program. As part of this site assessment, SDG&E can calculate avoided
costs determining the value of avoiding or deferring an infrastructure upgrade. To the extent TEAS
participants are also receiving make-ready incentives or other ratepayer-funded charging equipment
rebates, the ALM site assessment should weigh the benefits and costs of different ALM solutions.
Ultimately, the customer must be given the opportunity to decide whether to implement an ALM
solution in exchange for cost reductions or non-monetary benefits (i.e., backup power through a co-
located energy storage system). If a site host decides to elect an ALM solution, they must also be
free to choose which customer-side ALM technology they would like to install and use.
III. THE COMMISSION SHOULD CONSIDER STRATEGIES TO MEASURE AND
MONITOR ANY POTENTIAL NEGATIVE IMPACTS THE TEAS PROGRAM
MAY HAVE ON SENATE BILL 676 VGI STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION.
VGIC recognizes that certain elements of SDG&E’s proposal may represent core competency areas
for an IOU. For example, the “Site review and analysis” offering relies on SDG&E’s “years of
experience and expertise.”4 However, given that this is a relatively nascent industry, VGIC questions
whether more safeguards or monitoring should be used to facilitate SDG&E’s proposed expanded
role in the TE advisory market. It is important to avoid compromising the formation of innovative
new competitive offerings and limiting customer choice. VGIC’s primary concern is that SDG&E’s
well-intentioned implementation may inadvertently hinder VGI market development through
misinformation or the imposition of unnecessary constraints. For example, Section I above flags one
area where SDG&E could limit the market for VGI solutions via improper customer education.
Lastly, VGIC has been informed by site developers and EV service providers of mixed signals from
utilities over whether ALM solutions are permitted for use in their territories and which solutions
would be deemed eligible to defer or avoid an infrastructure upgrade.
VGI represents a relatively new and complex set of solutions. Customer experience, EV load
management, and using EVs as critical grid resources may be put at risk without sufficient oversight
and guardrails for IOU implementation. VGIC believes the Commission should consider strategies
to remain keenly informed about any potential negative impact the TEAS program may have on
Senate Bill 676 VGI strategies implementation and the VGI market. Specifically, the annual VGI
Forum, as established by the recent Decision on Transportation Electrification Policy and
Investment,5 should expressly consider whether the TEAS program – and any future IOU-
implemented TE advisory service offerings – present any barriers to VGI market development and
achieving the VGI strategies adopted in the 2020 SB 676 Implementation and VGI Strategies
4 Advice Letter at 27.
5 Decision on Transportation Electrification Policy and Investment. Decision 22-11-040. November 21, 2022.
Ordering Paragraph 11 at pg 231.
3

June 20, 2023
Page 4 of 4
Decision.6 We also encourage the Commission to consider how best to allow ALM solution
providers to engage with customers directly in concert with SDG&E’s TEAS program
implementation. At a minimum, SDG&E should consult VGI industry stakeholders and service
providers, particularly providers of V2X solutions and other new technologies, about best practices
for site evaluation, installation, customer education, and interconnection. This is a nascent but
growing field, and the industry stakeholders and service providers have the most experience
deploying real-world installations and implementing these customer solutions.
IV. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit this response to the Advice Letter and looks
forward to collaborating with the Commission and stakeholders in this proceeding.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Senior Policy Manager
VEHICLE GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
cc: Greg Anderson Regulatory Tariff Manager (SDGETariffs@sdge.com)
Service list R.18-12-006
6 Decision Concerning Implementation of Senate Bill 676 and Vehicle-Grid Integration Strategies. Decision
20-12-029. December 21, 2020.
4