May 3, 2023
CPUC Energy Division Tariff Unit
505 Van Ness Avenue
San Francisco, California 94102
EDTariffUnit@cpuc.ca.gov
Re: Comments of the Vehicle Grid Integration Council to Resolution E-5267:
Approval, with Modifications, of Southern California Edison Company’s,
Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s, and San Diego Gas & Electric
Company’s proposed modifications to the Emergency Load Reduction
Program.
Dear Sir or Madam:
Pursuant to General Order 96-B and the Comment Letter accompanying Draft Resolution
E-5267 (“Draft Resolution”), the Vehicle Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) respectfully
comments on the proposed approval of the Joint Advice Letter 4142-E of San Diego Gas and
Electric Company (“SDG&E”), Advice Letter 4950-E of Southern California Edison Company
(“SCE”), and Advice Letter 6826-E of Pacific Gas and Electric Company (“PG&E”) submitted on
January 17, 2023 and Supplemental Advice Letters SCE 4950-E-A, PG&E 6826-E-A, and
SDG&E 4142-E-A filed on March 24, 2023.
The Draft Resolution adopts several important updates to the Emergency Load Reduction
Program (“ELRP”) and, most importantly, retains the critical elements of the Electric Vehicle
(“EV”)/Vehicle-Grid Integration (“VGI”) Aggregation customer group (i.e., subgroup A.5) that
serves as the foundation for the future of bidirectional vehicle-to-grid (“V2G”) activities in
California. In particular, VGIC strongly supports the Commission’s confirmation that the 30-hour
dispatch condition specific to customer group A.5 is an appropriate and necessary component of
ELRP, given the relatively nascent V2G market.1 In modifying the Joint ALs to uphold California’s
commitment to advancing VGI, the Draft Resolution is a symbol of continued progress toward
widespread VGI operations and represents an encouraging reflection of close collaboration
between subject matter experts at the Commission, investor-owned utilities, and industry
stakeholders. VGIC is pleased to see that the ELRP modifications for 2023 (including the critical
components that have been reaffirmed) are consistent with the needs of customers and broader
VGI market development.
1 Draft Resolution at 15.

May 3, 2023
Page 2 of 2
Specifically, VGIC is encouraged by the Commission’s reiteration that minimum dispatch
conditions “provide more certainty to aggregators regarding potential compensation”2 and that
“the market for VGI technologies, and in particular bi-directional charging equipment, is in its
early stages of development and… the ELRP pilot [is] an opportunity to deploy and scale this
resource.”3 The Draft Resolution will further unlock EVs as a critical resource supporting grid
reliability and broad multi-sectoral decarbonization.
While VGIC is largely supportive of the Draft Resolution, we do have a minor concern
regarding the Calculation of Group A ILR using Method 2. As CalSSA points out, this could lead
to under-compensation for the unique category of resources within sub-group A.4. This may also
be true for A.5 participants. For example, a bi-directional EV might be able to provide exports
during the most acute net load peak hours (i.e., 6-8 pm) but then may need to stop exporting during
the final hour of the ELRP window (i.e., 8-9 pm) to preserve EV battery range for mobility
purposes. In such a case, Method 2 could unfairly penalize A.5 participants. Thus, if the
Commission adopts Method 2, there should be an option for A.5 participants to shorten the duration
of the dispatch window (e.g., to 6-8 pm).
With this in mind, VGIC strongly recommends that the Commission adopt the Draft
Resolution during its May 18th voting meeting.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit these comments to the Draft Resolution and
looks forward to future collaboration with the Commission and IOUs on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Senior Policy Manager
Vehicle Grid Integration Council
cc: Daniel Horan, Energy Division (Daniel.Horan@cpuc.ca.gov)
Aloke Gupta, Energy Division (Aloke.Gupta@cpuc.ca.gov)
Service lists R.20-11-003, A.22-05-002
2 Ibid.
3 Ibid.