June 5, 2023
Hon. Michelle L. Phillips
Secretary
New York Public Service Commission
3 Empire State Plaza
Albany, NY 12223-1350
RE: Case 23-E-0070: Proceeding on Motion of the Commission to Address Barriers to
Medium- and Heavy-Duty Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure
Joint Comments of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
and New York Battery and Energy Storage Technology Consortium (NY-BEST)
on Medium- and Heavy-Duty Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure
Introduction
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)1 is a 501(c)(6) membership-based trade
association committed to advancing the role of electric vehicles (EVs) and vehicle-grid
integration (VGI) through policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports
the transition to decarbonized transportation and electric sectors by ensuring the value from EV
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., BorgWarner, bp pulse,
Customized Energy Solutions, dcbel, Enel X North America, Inc., Enphase, Fermata Energy, FlexCharging, FLO
EV Charging, Ford Motor Company, FreeWire Technologies, Inc., General Motors, GridWiz, Hoosier Energy,
Innovation Core SEI, IoTecha, Kaluza, Kitu Systems, Ninedot Energy, Nissan Group of North America, Nuvve
Holding Corporation, Peak Power, Qcells, Sacramento Municipal Utility District, Stellantis N.V., Sunrun, The
Mobility House, Toyota Motor North America, Inc., Utilidata, Veloce Energy, Inc., Wallbox USA Inc., and
WeaveGrid. The views expressed in these Comments are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of
all individual VGIC member companies or supporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/)
1

deployments and flexible EV charging and discharging is recognized and compensated to
achieve a more reliable, affordable, and efficient electric grid.
The New York Battery and Energy Storage Technology Consortium (NY-BEST) is a not-
for-profit industry trade association with a mission to grow the energy storage industry in New
York. We act as a voice of the energy storage industry for more than 180 member organizations
on matters related to advanced batteries and energy storage technologies. NY-BEST has
expanded its work into the transportation electrification space as we see the significant
opportunity to integrate electric vehicles (EV) onto the grid through dynamic vehicle grid
integration strategies. EVs will soon represent a large storage resource on New York’s grid and,
when connected to bi-directional chargers, can support the integration of wind and solar
necessary to decarbonize the electricity sector and help meet the State’s aggressive goals for
GHG reductions. Our membership includes global corporations, start-ups, project developers,
leading research institutions and universities, and numerous companies involved in the electricity
and transportation sectors.2
VGIC and NY-BEST appreciate the opportunity to respond to the Commission’s
questions in the Order Instituting Proceeding and Soliciting Comments. Our comments will
mainly address the Commission’s questions 11 and 12, which are focused on VGI and energy
storage issues, as well as discuss the intersection between VGI and the overarching themes of
future-proofing and proactive planning.
NY-BEST and VGIC estimate that the electrification of transportation described in the
New York Climate Action Council Scoping Plan will result in more than 600 GWh of energy
storage capacity in New York State’s vehicle population by 2050.3 Without proper and proactive
2 NY-BEST comments represent the interests of the organization as a whole and not the views of any one particular
member. Our members have diverse interests and the organization’s views are intended to be reflective of the energy
storage industry collectively and to support the organization’s goals to grow the energy storage industry in New
York.
3 Most of the scenarios analyzed have nearly full conversion of the vehicle fleet to electric. Using the CAC scoping
plan input data of vehicle population of 9,519,878 light-duty and 176,774 medium- and heavy-duty vehicles and
2

utility planning processes, the EV market will face hurdles that will inhibit adoption of these
technologies, and further, timely achievement of the State’s Climate Leadership and Community
Protection Act goals. The potential impacts are even more severe for medium- and heavy-duty
(MHD) EVs due to the normally increased size of the individual load and the potential
concentration of charging infrastructure to efficiently serve fleets and long-haul transport. Proper
planning and managed charging will manage load to mitigate stress on the grid, make the most of
limited grid capacity, and avoid or defer the need for significant transmission and distribution
system upgrades and infrastructure investments with less impact to ratepayers than scenarios
without managed charging. The benefits of managed charging for New York have been modeled
and documented in several recent studies.4
The immense storage capacity onboard the batteries powering these vehicles presents an
opportunity to provide critical grid functions to support a decarbonized electricity system. The
flexibility of these resources, through managed charging, automated load management (ALM),
and bidirectional charging can be leveraged to reduce renewable curtailment, provide power
when renewable generation is insufficient, address the challenges being raised in the new
Commission Order initiating a process regarding zero emissions target,5 and provide many other
grid services. Furthermore, incorporating stationary energy storage in combination with these
assets provides additional optimization and efficiency benefits. A cost-effective transition to
renewable energy requires that the energy storage capacity of fleet vehicles, along with
stationary storage, are effectively integrated into the electricity system. This integration will
contain costs by optimizing grid investments and providing critical grid services as well as—
assuming a battery size of 75kWh and 150kWh, respectively, results in a storage capacity of 741 GWh for full
electrification.
4 See NYSERDA. Transportation Electrification Distribution System Impact Study. 2022.
https://www.nyserda.ny.gov/-/media/Project/Nyserda/Files/Publications/Research/Transportation/22-13-
Transportation-Electricification-Distribution-System-Impact-Study.pdf.
See also Synapse. Distribution System Investments to Enable Medium- and Heavy-Duty Vehicle Electrification: A
Case Study of New York. 2023. https://www.synapse-
energy.com/sites/default/files/Synapse%20MHDV%20Integration%20Costs%20Final%20Report.pdf
55 See Case 15-E-0302.
3

particularly important for MHD fleets—providing additional value streams to enable the
conversion to electrification and, in turn, accelerate the transition to electrified transportation.
Question 11: Discuss how battery energy storage systems and other DERs can be
implemented in both short-term and long-term planning for EV charging needs across
vehicle classes. Is VGI technology at a sufficient level of maturity to impact short-term
planning considerations? If so, describe how; if not, describe why not.
a. Automated Load Management
Automated Load Management (ALM), also known as EV Energy Management Systems
(EMS), refers to the use of behind-the-meter software (e.g., power sharing) or hardware (e.g.,
integrated or co-located battery storage) approaches to limit EV charging demand at the service
connection to a predetermined level below the aggregated charging capacity of the EV Supply
Equipment (EVSE). For example, a charging site with five 150 kW DCFCs can use ALM to
limit its peak demand to 600 kW, compared to a peak demand of 750 kW without ALM. This
can help avoid or defer the need to upgrade certain customer-side and utility-side make-ready
infrastructure to accommodate the new charging load. The reduced need for infrastructure
upgrades can generate savings for the customer installing EVSE and ratepayers at large and can
accelerate the energization timeline for that site due to the lower overall engineering and
construction needs. The potential cost and time savings from ALM can be considerable given the
significant infrastructure needs of MHD EVs. Additionally, ALM can be used to overcome
physical space constraints in locations where it is difficult to upgrade electrical equipment, also
helping to accelerate installation and energization timelines. As examples of potential cost
savings, Pacific Gas & Electric has worked with EV service providers to implement EV EMS
solutions at multi-unit dwellings and workplace host sites as of Q4 2020 and saved between
$30,000 and $200,000 per project.6 Southern California Edison also implemented EV EMS to
6 Pacific Gas & Electric. Presentation at CPUC ALM/EV EMS Workshop, Panel 2. 2021.
4

deploy 168 charging stations at $3,000 per port, significantly less than comparable deployments
at $10,000-$15,000 per port without EV EMS.7
As one ALM approach, energy storage resources can be deployed with EVSE to provide
numerous benefits. As discussed above, energy storage, either co-located at the site or integrated
into EVSE, can reduce the peak load of the site, which both reduces the need for infrastructure
investment and opens more sites to be available for EVSE installations. Further, energy storage
can reduce operating cost and grid stress, particularly for lower-utilization sites or sites with high
co-incident usage, by shifting load timing and reducing ramp rates. Co-located storage can also
enhance reliability by providing emergency backup power for critical charging needs, by
providing routine grid support services, and by creating additional revenue streams to accelerate
the adoption of electrification.
ALM technologies, including those that incorporate energy storage, are mature and
already being deployed today and therefore should be considered in all near-term activities
related to MHD electrification. The Make-Ready Program Midpoint Review Staff Whitepaper in
Docket 18-E-0138 recognized the benefits of ALM and proposed to extend make-ready
incentives to these technologies.8 Staff’s recommendation was widely supported by stakeholders,
including VGIC.9 The Commission also recently directed the Joint Utilities to propose additional
incentives for ALM technologies in Docket 22-E-0236. Given the significant infrastructure needs
of MHD EVs, it would be a rational step to also provide ALM incentives to MHD charging sites.
Any analysis or evaluation of future infrastructure needs for EVs should include an
assessment of opportunities for ALM. While we support proactive planning and investment in
grid infrastructure to achieve the pace and scale of charging infrastructure deployment needed to
achieve NY’s transportation electrification goals, it is critical that ALM be rigorously evaluated
relative to traditional infrastructure investments to minimize ratepayer impacts. Utilities should
7 EPIC Policy + Innovation Coordination Group. Transportation Electrification Workstream Report. 2021.
https://epicpartnership.org/resources/Transportation_Electrification_Workstream_Report_Final.pdf.
8 Staff refers to the same suite of technologies as “cost-reducing advanced technologies.”
9 See VGIC’s reply comments, pg. 2. Docket 18-E-0138.
5

engage in a transparent process to demonstrate that proactive investments are prudent and abide
by least-cost planning principles.
b. Vehicle-to-everything (V2X)
Bidirectional charging use cases can leverage EVs’ latent battery capacity to provide
backup power to customers, manage customer bills, and support the grid through vehicle-to-grid
(V2G) exports. Revenues from V2G exports may even be more important for some MHD EVs
than light-duty EVs, helping offset the relatively higher upfront costs of MHD electric vehicles
and associated charging infrastructure and improving the financial viability of electrification
projects. Bidirectional vehicles and EVSE are commercially available for the MHD sector,10 and
several V2G projects currently participate in and receive compensation from utility programs
around the country, such as Massachusetts’ ConnectedSolutions Daily Dispatch program and
California’s Emergency Load Reduction Program.11 The Make-Ready Program Midpoint
Review Staff Whitepaper also recently recommended that the Joint Utilities update their VDER
tariffs to specify eligibility for V2X applications.
At a minimum, bidirectional charging equipment should be eligible for the same BTM
make-ready and charger rebates as unidirectional equipment. However, given the immense
10 See, for example: Nuvve Corporation. Blue Bird Delivers North America’s First-Ever Commercial Application of
Vehicle-to-Grid Technology in Electric School Bus Partnership with Nuvve and Illinois School Districts. March 23,
2021. https://nuvve.com/blue-bird-v2g-electric-bus-with-nuvve-and-illinois-school-districts/; Thomas Built Buses /
Daimler Trucks North America LLC (2021). The Safe-T-Liner C2 Jouley Electric School
Bus. https://thomasbuiltbuses.com/school-buses/saf-t-liner-c2-jouley; Lion Electric. Lion Electric Announces
Successful Electric School Bus Vehicle-to-Grid Deployment with Con Edison in New York. December 14,
2020. https://thelionelectric.com/img/medias/LION_Press_Release_White%20Plains%20EN%20FINAL.pdf; Nuvve
Corporation (2020). Nuvve DC Heavy Duty Charging Station Specifications
Sheet. https://nuvve.com/wpcontent/uploads/2020/04/nuvve-dc-heavy-duty-spec-sheet-1.0.pdf; Fermata Energy.
Proven Results and Cost Savings with V2G Technology. October 14, 2020. https://www.fermataenergy.com/news-
press/proven-results-andcost-savings-with-v2g-technology; Rhombus Energy Solutions. V2G Charging, Control,
and Management 50- 500kW: Bidirectional. https://rhombusenergysolutions.com/products.
11 See, for example, SDG&E Unveils Region’s First V2G Project https://www.sdgenews.com/article/sdge-unveils-
regions-first-v2g-project ; Highland Electric Fleets Coordinates Electric School Buses’ Summer Job – Supporting
Local Grid with Vehicle-to-Grid Technology https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/highland-electric-fleets-
coordinates-electric-school-buses-summer-job--supporting-local-grid-with-vehicle-to-grid-technology-
301611928.html
6

potential of V2X to support customer needs, bolster grid reliability, and lower system costs – and
the higher cost of V2X-capable equipment relative to unidirectional-only equipment – VGIC and
NY-BEST believe it is reasonable to offer an incremental rebate to V2X customers to partially
offset the higher upfront costs of purchasing and interconnecting V2X EVSE and the associated
equipment. Based on our discussions with industry participants, there is an approximately 30%
cost premium for a bidirectional DCFC compared to a unidirectional DCFC. VGIC and NY-
BEST believe an incremental V2X rebate is critical to spurring the nascent bidirectional charging
market in New York. We offer ourselves as a resource and hope to collaborate closely with
stakeholders to determine the appropriate incentive level for bidirectional charging equipment.
In addition, while V2X solutions have demonstrated clear benefits to both customers and
the grid, the technology is new and unfamiliar to most customers. To overcome this gap, VGIC
and NY-BEST recommend that the utilities’ marketing, education, and outreach and technical
assistance teams work to educate customers on the benefits of V2X use cases, capable chargers,
vehicles and associated equipment, appropriate interconnection pathways, applicable rates and
programs, and any technical considerations, including opportunities to co-locate and integrate
other types of distributed energy resources. Given the potential complexity of interconnecting
large V2X sites, the utilities’ technical assistance teams should – in a technology-neutral manner
– actively support individual customers and fleets through the design and interconnection process
and ensure a streamlined customer experience.
The Make-Ready Program Midpoint Review Staff Whitepaper also recommended
addressing interconnection and other barriers to VGI through a stakeholder process. As discussed
in VGIC’s reply comments in that proceeding, interconnection issues should be addressed by the
Interconnection Technical Working Group for both the light-duty and MHD sectors. However,
the Commission should adopt a UL 1741 SB waiver for V2G DC EVSE. As discussed in VGIC
and NY-BEST’s recent comments in Docket 18-E-0138, the Joint Utilities began requiring
interconnecting DERs to be certified to UL 1741 SB on January 1, 2023. Since there is limited
availability of V2G-capable DC EVSE currently on the market, this requirement effectively
7

freezes the deployment of V2G-capable DC EVSE until SB-certified DC EVSE are more widely
available. The new V2G Equipment List recently launched by the California Energy
Commission serves as a common public database of UL-certified V2G-capable DC EVSE, and
currently lists three chargers, none of which are certified to UL 1741 SB.12 In order to ensure
V2G DC EVSE continues to be deployed in the near term, VGIC recommends that the
Commission consider a temporary exemption for V2G DC EVSE from the UL 1741 SB
requirement. This would provide critical support to V2G DC EVSE deployment efforts in New
York and would align well with recent developments in other leading V2G efforts. For example,
in recognition that availability of UL 1741 SB-certified inverters is extremely limited, the
California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) recently pushed back the implementation of UL
1741 SB to August 29, 2023.
Question 12: How can managed charging programs reduce upfront infrastructure needs?
Unlike the ALM approaches discussed above, managed charging programs do not
directly reduce the upfront infrastructure needs of EV charging equipment itself, but instead help
mitigate grid system upgrades and the ongoing costs and impacts of EV charging on the grid.
Managed charging programs can encourage EV owners to shift their charging load to off-peak
periods and/or limit charging load during periods with high grid stress, thereby avoiding high
energy costs during peak periods as well as reducing the need to build out distribution and
transmission infrastructure to accommodate higher peak loads. When incentivized to take such
actions, MHD EVs can have outsized impacts due to their large battery capacity and potential for
coordinated response as part of fleets. From the fleet owner’s perspective, managed charging
also provides an opportunity to lower charging costs, making the economics of electrification
more favorable.
12 California Energy Commission. V2G Equipment List. https://v2gel.energy.ca.gov/Home/ProcessView
8

However, managed charging programs can indirectly help reduce upfront costs by
encouraging the adoption and use of the ALM approaches discussed above. ALM technologies
can both help limit upfront infrastructure costs and allow EV charging sites to participate in
managed charging. For example, co-located or integrated battery storage can limit site utility
service demand to avoid or reduce upfront infrastructure upgrades and also enable load shifting
by charging during off-peak periods and serving EV charging load during on-peak periods.
Similarly, power-sharing software and other EV charge management solutions can maintain EV
charging peak demand set-points as well as optimize ongoing energy costs with automated
actions. Managed charging and ALM incentives should consider the various benefits that these
technologies can deliver to customers and the grid at large.
The Commission recognized the benefits of managed charging for MHD EVs when it
directed the Joint Utilities to file Commercial Managed Charging Programs in Docket 22-E-
0236. VGIC and NY-BEST look forward to engaging in that docket on the specific designs of
the proposed programs. Additionally, as discussed in VGIC’s reply comments in Docket 18-E-
0138, the Commission should direct the VGI Working Group to, among other tasks, explore
steps to incorporate managed charging and VGI into the Joint Utilities’ demand response
programs.
Conclusion
VGIC and NY-BEST appreciate the opportunity to provide these comments and look
forward to working with the Commission, the joint utilities, and other stakeholders to ensure the
success of New York’s transportation electrification efforts.
Respectfully submitted,
Ed Burgess
9

Senior Policy Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
(510) 665-7811
www.vgicouncil.org
William P. Acker
Executive Director
New York Battery and Energy Storage Technology Consortium (NY-BEST)
230 Washington Avenue Ext., Suite 101, Albany NY 12203
(518) 694-8474
www.ny-best.org
10