October 25, 2023
Informal Comments of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
on Ameren Illinois Electric Vehicle Pilots
Introduction
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC) is a 501(c)(6) nonprofit member-based
association focused on accelerating the role of smart electric vehicle (EV) charging and
discharging (i.e., vehicle-grid integration or “VGI”) through policy development, education,
outreach, and research.1 Scaling VGI is an essential part of transportation electrification and
supports the following key goals:
• Benefit EV drivers and fleet owners by reducing the cost of ownership and providing
additional value streams like backup power.
• Decarbonize the transportation sector by accelerating EV adoption through
additional benefits to EV drivers and fleet owners.
• Support the evolving electric grid by providing essential grid services as intermittent
energy generation and distributed energy resource penetration increases.
• Increase affordability by placing downward pressure on rates, in turn reducing
electricity bills for all customers.
• Improve community resiliency and security during planned and unplanned grid
outages.
• Foster economic activity through innovation, competition, and market transformation.
With the proper utility and regulatory support and coordination, these goals can be
achieved, and EV drivers and fleets in Illinois can play a critical role in the acceleration of both
transportation electrification and grid decarbonization. Our vision for VGI encompasses the
following key elements:
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., BorgWarner, Enel X North
America, Inc., Fermata Energy, Ford Motor Company, General Motors, Nissan Group of North America, Nuvve
Holding Corporation, Stellantis N.V., Toyota Motor North America, Blue Grid, BP Pulse, Customized Energy
Solutions, dcbel, Emporia, EnergyHub, Enphase, EV.Energy, FlexCharging, FLO EV Charging, FreeWire Technologies,
Inc., Gridwiz, Hoosier Energy, Innovation Core SEI, IoTecha, Kaluza, Kitu Systems, Landis+Gyr, NineDot
Energy, Peak Power, QCells, Sacramento Municipal Utility District, Sunrun, Synop, The Mobility House, Inc.,
Utilidata, Veloce Energy, Inc., Wallbox USA Inc., and WeaveGrid. The views expressed in these comments are those
of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all individual VGIC member companies or
supporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/).
1

• Ensure customer mobility needs are satisfied: Drivers and fleets can support the grid
without compromising mobility needs.
• Managed charging will benefit EV drivers and fleet operators: Drivers and fleets in
Illinois will be provided a menu of opportunities to align charging with the times of day
when electricity prices are low, reducing EV and fleet operating costs by as much as 50%
compared to unmanaged charging. Lowering the total ownership cost will accelerate
overall EV adoption by drivers and fleet managers in Illinois.
• EVs provide reliable emergency power during blackouts: During extreme weather
blackouts or other power outages, EV drivers and fleets can utilize bidirectional charging
capabilities to send energy to a home, building, or microgrid, serving as a generator and
providing safe backup power for households and communities.
• Charging infrastructure deployment accelerates: Smarter management of EV charging
can help accelerate the deployment of EV charging infrastructure, encouraging wider
access to EV charging.
• VGI enables EVs to provide valuable services to the grid and generate revenue: V1G
managed charging (unidirectional charging) and V2X (vehicle-to-everything bidirectional
charging) will enable electric vehicles to both receive and feed power back to the grid,
providing grid services such as demand response, peak shaving, frequency regulation, and
more. A number of utilities across the US have implemented programs that provide
compensation for these valuable grid services.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide the following recommendations on the Ameren
Illinois (“Ameren”) Draft EV Pilot Project Scope.
I. Ameren Should Focus on Implementing All Three Pilots Directly With Customers
Rather Than at Ameren Facilities.
VGIC commends Ameren for taking important first steps in developing their proposed EV
Pilot Projects, as presented at the Beneficial Electrification (“BE”) Pilot Program Stakeholder
Meeting held on October 4, 2023.2 Ameren presented the proposed scope of three EV pilots at the
stakeholder meeting: a managed charging pilot, a sub-metering pilot, and an energy management
systems (“EMS”) pilot. VGIC agrees these three focus areas can potentially increase the EV value
proposition for owners and fleets immensely and, in turn, accelerate the growth of EV charging.
This vision has come to life as EV and VGI solution deployment has increased over the
past several years. For example, in Minnesota, Xcel Company (“Xcel”) has offered a Residential
EV Service program since 2018, reducing EV ownership costs for their customers. This program
2 Ameren Illinois. Draft EV Pilot Project Scope Overview. October 4, 2023.
2

and Xcel’s Charging Perks program use networked EV supply equipment (“EVSE”) and telematics
to manage charging and reduce customer fueling costs.3 Involved stakeholders deemed the
program a success,4 and in 2020, the pilot was expanded to a permanent program for all eligible
ratepayers in Xcel’s service territory. VGIC provides several other examples below of customer-
implemented managed charging pilots and programs that have been implemented or approved for
use with customers, including in Illinois:
Similarly, several states, including California, New York, Massachusetts, and Maryland,
have all adopted a pathway for customers to use networked EVSE and/or vehicle telematics to
submeter EV charging load.5 Regarding EV EMS, these solutions have been used for various use
cases in recent years. For example, Pacific Gas and Electric (“PG&E”) has implemented this
solution in its EV Charge Network program to save customers as much as $200,000 at charging
3 Minnesota Public Utilities Commission, Order Approving Electric Vehicle Home Service and Voluntary Electric
Vehicle Charger Service Programs as Modified. October 6, 2020. Pg. 3.
https://efiling.web.commerce.state.mn.us/edockets/searchDocuments.do?method=showPoup&documentId=%7b
20E1FE74-0000-C715-9765-D3D7DC10DE0A%7d&documentTitle=202010-167089-01
4 According to Xcel, Pilot customers have saved on average over $2,000 on upfront metering and charger
installation costs. Furthermore, Pilot participants “have been charging approximately 96% off-peak, delivering
savings on their electric bills and limiting the impact that charging may have on system peaks.” Xcel reported an
87% overall satisfaction rate for the Pilot and 95% overall satisfaction for the charger installation.
5 SCE Charge Ready Programs, Southern California Edison Company’s Vehicle-Grid Integration Strategies Annual
Report for 2022. March 15, 2023. Pg. 15. New York Public Service Commission, Consolidated Edison Company of
New York, Inc. Managed Charging Implementation Plan. September 26, 2022. Pg. 9-10; Massachusetts Three-Year
Energy Efficiency Plan 2019-2021, Appendix K. https://ma-eeac.org/wp-content/uploads/Exh.-1-Final-Plan-10-31-
18-With-Appendices-no-bulk.pdf; Public Service Commission of Maryland, Order Approving, in Part, Modifications
to the Statewide Electric Vehicle Charging Pilot Program. January 11, 2022. Pg. 23.
3

sites.6 The EV EMS solution set is critical to addressing distribution grid constraints, which
represents a major, fast-growing barrier for EV charger deployment and, to a greater extent, fleet
depot development.
Given the myriad of successful, long-running pilots and programs implemented by similar
utilities, Ameren should strongly consider focusing its resources on piloting customer
implementation of these managed charging, submetering, and EV EMS solutions. Ameren is
poised to learn much more from a small-scale, no-regrets customer deployment than from
demonstrating well-established, commercially available technology that is already deployed
throughout the country. Given the technology maturity and pace of deployment of managed
charging, submetering, and EV EMS, VGIC strongly recommends Ameren focus solely on
implementing pilots in which Ameren customers can directly participate. This will yield
valuable, real-world learnings about customer marketing, education, and outreach (“ME&O”)
strategies, customer support, customer billing system updates and integration, reductions to
average service connection timelines, net peak load reduction, customer costs and benefits, utility
costs and benefits, and ratepayer costs and benefits. Based on VGIC’s assessment of pilots and
programs throughout the country, focusing on piloting customer-centric programs will provide the
most efficient path toward Commission approval for future large-scale utility BE programs.
II. The Sub-Metering Pilot Should Focus on Subtractive Billing for Rates RTP, PSP,
EVCP Using Embedded Submetering Technology.
The Illinois Commerce Commission (“ICC”) Order 22-0431 requires Ameren to
“undertake a pilot that explores how to effectively facilitate sub-metering” and use practices to
support sub-metering, “such as automated subtractive billing.” Ameren’s proposed submetering
pilot appears to be largely focused on testing the feasibility of submetering technologies, including
utility-owned submeters. VGIC reiterates that sub-metering technology is used throughout the
country, and it may be most appropriate to focus on the ICC directive as it relates to automated
subtractive billing rather than re-demonstrating commercially available submetering technology.
Ameren should consider focusing its efforts on piloting the implementation of subtractive billing
as it relates to Ameren’s TOU rates (i.e., RTP, PSP, and EVCP), which can promote EV customer
participation in these TOU rates without installing a separate meter.7 Specifically, VGIC
recommends the Submetering Pilot should focus on implementing subtractive billing for
Ameren’s RTP, PSP, and EVCP rates using non-utility-owned sub-meters. Ameren’s
proposed sub-metering pilot will “demonstrate the ability to sub-meter EV charging load” by
6 PG&E. Vehicle Grid Integration Report by Pacific Gas and Electric Company (U 39 E) – Attachment A: Pacific Gas &
Electric Annual Vehicle-Grid Integration Strategies Report. March 15, 2023. Pg. 8.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M503/K589/503589008.PDF
7 Illinois Commerce Commission, Order 22-0431. March 23, 2023. Pg. 128.
4

installing and leveraging both Ameren-owned and embedded sub-metering technologies.
However, VGIC notes that current submetering implementations across the US use embedded
submetering technology in the EVSE or vehicle, rather than utility-owned submeters, which results
in lower overall costs and, in turn, increased TOU rate participation from EV customers. This
approach will align with best practices, familiarize Ameren’s EV customers with TOU rates, and
lay the groundwork for large-scale automated subtractive billing within Ameren’s billing system.
In other words, the key question within this pilot should not be “Are submeters accurate?” (for
which existing data and Utility Commission decisions across the country already answers), but
rather “How can Ameren integrate non-utility submeter data into its billing system and enable
subtractive billing?” Ensuring this more appropriate research question is asked will result in a more
effective and valuable sub-metering pilot effort.
III. The EV EMS Pilot Should Include Level-2 Chargers and Consider Software- and
Hardware-Based Solutions.
EV EMS can help deploy EVSE at sites that would otherwise face lengthy energization
timelines, for example, due to primary and secondary distribution system upgrades that would be
needed if EV EMS were not utilized. Additionally, as noted in its EV EMS Pilot proposal,
customers can leverage “an EV EMS solution to manage EV charging loads thus minimizing the
need for EVSE infrastructure costs”.8 VGIC commends Ameren for proposing a pilot that tests the
ability of EMS to optimize charging load and minimize needed infrastructure upgrades. We
recommend that Ameren leverage learnings and best practices from other EV EMS
implementations across the nation. Specifically, VGIC recommends Ameren consider the
following modifications to the EV EMS pilot:
1. The EV EMS Pilot should include L2 chargers in addition to L3 chargers. VGIC
agrees with Ameren that it is important to include L3 chargers as part of the EV EMS
pilot, given the significant impacts that L3 charging can have on the grid. However, it
is equally important to include L2 chargers in the pilot, as well. Long-dwell, multi-
charger sites like workplace charging and multi-unit dwellings may be particularly well
suited for software-based EV EMS that shares power across these chargers to ensure
the maximum aggregate charging load does not exceed the electrical capacity of the
grid at that location.
2. Ameren’s EV EMS Pilot should consider both software- and hardware-based
solutions. As proposed, Ameren’s EV EMS pilot would leverage an EV EMS solution
to manage EV load, minimizing the need for EVSE infrastructure cost.9 While VGIC
supports this concept, we recommend Ameren enhance the pilot by using hardware-
based solutions as well as software-based EV EMS. Both solution sets can achieve the
8 Ameren Illinois, Draft EV Pilot Project Scope Overview, October 4, 2023. Pg. 19.
9 Ibid.
5

same goal of minimizing the need for EVSE infrastructure costs and shortening the
service connection/energization timeline. Specifically, stationary energy storage
systems (“ESS”) paired with EV charging can be used, and several commercially
available technologies are in use today that either co-locate or integrate stationary
batteries into the EV charging station. These ESS-paired chargers can also benefit from
increased charger reliability, as the stationary battery can provide backup power to the
charger during a grid outage.
IV. Ameren Could Enhance the Managed Charging Pilot by Considering Expansion to
Non-Residential Customers and Customers Using Level 1 Charging.
The managed charging program examples in the figure above include non-residential
customers and customers using Level 1 charging. With this in mind, Ameren’s proposed managed
charging pilot could be modified in the future to include these customer types.
1. Expanding the Managed Charging Pilot to commercial customers could
enhance the pilot design. Commercial EV customers and fleets may provide a
larger flexible load capacity per customer than residential customers. Additionally,
some commercial fleets may have highly predictable duty cycles, which can make
charge management easier and more reliable for the utility. With this in mind,
VGIC recommends Ameren consider eligibility for commercial EV customers in
the Managed Charging Pilot.
2. Ameren’s managed charging pilot could allow for participation from Level-1
(“L1”) charging customers participating through telematics. As proposed, the
Managed Charging Pilot would allow Ameren residential customers with Level-2
(“L2”) charging equipment to participate in the program through either the charger-
or vehicle-based participation pathway to create a clear path for residential
customers. While the pilot specifies it is for L2 charging customers, Ameren could
allow those without networked Level 2 chargers (i.e., including customers using at-
home Level 1 charging) to participate via vehicle telematics. This could be one
pathway to increasing pilot participation as needed.
V. Ameren Should Consider Implementing a Fourth Pilot to Familiarize Itself with
Bidirectional Charging Equipment.
In addition to the three proposed pilots, VGIC recommends that Ameren consider including a
fourth pilot in the near future that focuses on vehicle-to-everything (“V2X”) bidirectional charging
equipment. A V2X bidirectional charging pilot could start as a technology proof of concept for
vehicle-to-grid (“V2G”) and/or vehicle-to-building (“V2B”), and could even include an export rate
demonstration for V2G at a later phase. Ameren could also pilot a combined technology and
6

market transformation pilot for V2B and/or V2G. Notably, ComEd is pursuing a V2X electric
school bus project at this time, and it may be appropriate for Ameren to explore this technology as
part of their EV pilots.
VI. Conclusion
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit these comments on Ameren’s Draft EV Pilot
Project Scope. We look forward to further collaboration with Ameren and other stakeholders in
Illinois on this important initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
Zach Woogen
/s/ Zach Woogen
Senior Policy Manager
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
(510) 665-7811
www.vgicouncil.org
7