BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 21-06-017
Modernize the Electric Grid for a High (Filed June 24, 2021)
Distributed Energy Resources Future.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGES’ RULING SETTING A WORKSHOP, ADMITTING
INTO THE RECORD PART 1 OF THE ELECTRIFICATION IMPACTS STUDY AND
RESEARCH PLAN, AND SEEKING COMMENTS
Zach Woogen
Senior Policy Manager
Albert Tapia
Policy Analyst
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
10265 Rockingham Dr.
Suite #100-4061
Sacramento, California 95827
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
July 28, 2023

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 21-06-017
Modernize the Electric Grid for a High (Filed June 24, 2021)
Distributed Energy Resources Future.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGES’ RULING SETTING A WORKSHOP, ADMITTING
INTO THE RECORD PART 1 OF THE ELECTRIFICATION IMPACTS STUDY AND
RESEARCH PLAN, AND SEEKING COMMENTS
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) hereby submits
these comments on the Administrative Law Judges’ Ruling Setting a Workshop, Admitting into
the Record Part 1 of the Electrification Impacts Study and Research Plan, and Seeking
Comments (“EIS Part 1 Ruling”), issued by Administrative Law Judge (“ALJ”) Manisha
Lakhanpal and Kelly A. Hymes on May 9, 2023.
I. INTRODUCTION.
VGIC is a 501(c)6 membership-based advocacy group committed to advancing the role
of electric vehicles (“EVs”) and vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”) through policy development,
education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to a decarbonized transportation
and electric sector by ensuring the value from EV deployments and flexible EV charging and
discharging is recognized and compensated in support of a more reliable, affordable, and
efficient electric grid.
VGIC commends the Commission for commissioning the two-part Electrification
Impacts Study (“EIS”) series in an effort to determine the scope and scale of potential electric
1

grid impacts to support Rulemaking (R.) 21-06-017: the Order Instituting Rulemaking (OIR) to
Modernize the Electric Grid for a High Distributed Energy Resources Future1 and California’s
electrification goals. VGIC also appreciates the work and effort by the Kevala, Inc. (“Kevala”)
team in developing the comprehensive Part 1 Electrification Impacts Study (“Part 1 Study”)
which helps stakeholders understand the potential impacts of a high distributed energy resource
(“DER”) future. Importantly, VGIC appreciates the Commission’s diligent efforts in convening
stakeholders to participate and offer input on the EIS, and specifically, for facilitating the
discussions around transportation electrification (“TE”) load impacts and the vital role grid
integration technologies (e.g., advanced DER solutions and flexible load management) can play
in mitigating those impacts. To that end, VGIC believes deploying VGI technologies will be key
in preparing for potential TE load impacts and a high DER future. With this in mind, VGIC
generally supports Kevala’s approach, results, and insights for the Part 1 Study and offers
comments on the Part 1 Study and recommendations for the EIS Part 2 Study, summarized
below.
• Recommendations for EIS Part 2 Study:
o VGIC recommends that the EIS Part 2 Study consider several sensitivities for EV
load management to accurately reflect the value of VGI solutions.
o The Commission should consider contracting an independent evaluator to ensure
the IOUs provide consistent data quality and transparency for the Part 2 Study.
o The EIS Part 2 Study should ensure a wide set of non-wires solutions and load
mitigation strategies are considered.
• Comments on EIS Part 1 Study:
1 CPUC R.21-06-017, Order Instituting Rulemaking to Modernize the Electric Grid for a High
Distributed Energy Resources Future.
2

o VGIC supports EIS’s recommendation to increase the investor-owned utilities’
(“IOU”) Distribution Planning Process (“DPP”) planning horizon and integrate
policy-based demand scenarios into the annual DPP and Grid Needs Assessment
(“GNA”)/ Distribution Deferral Opportunity Reports (“DDOR”).
o VGIC supports EIS’s recommendation to estimate secondary infrastructure
upgrades needed to support California’s electrification policy goals.
o VGIC supports EIS’s recommendation to provide additional information about
transmission and sub-transmission constraints and identify where higher voltage
upgrades will be triggered due to distribution demand.
II. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR EIS PART 2 STUDY
A. The EIS Part 2 Study should consider several sensitivities for EV load
management to accurately reflect the value of VGI solutions.
As explained by Kevala, the Part 1 Study developed and analyzed a base case, calibrated
to the 2021 Integrated Energy Policy Report’s (“IEPR”) system-level forecasts to ensure
consistency with the IOUs’ GNAs.2 For Part 2, VGIC respectfully requests that the Kevala team
conduct several TE load scenarios based on different levels of managed charging:
• Baseline EV Load Management, based on 2021 IEPR Forecast used in Part 1.
This assessment has already been completed in Part 1.
• Mid EV Load Management, based on updated 2022 IEPR assumptions, which
reflect higher TOU rate participation from EVs.
2 EIS Part 1 Study, pg. ES-4.
3

• High EV Load Management, based on the inputs and assumptions for high EV
load management used in the June 2023 Updated Integrated Resource Planning
Inputs and Assumptions document.3
• High EV Load Management + EV Charger Export, based on the inputs and
assumptions used in the June 2023 Updated Integrated Resource Planning Inputs
and Assumptions document.4
VGIC believes that these scenarios will help to understand the value of VGI on the
distribution grid and provide critical policy guidance for the Commission moving forward. We
urge the Commission and Kevala to seize this opportunity to conduct a first-of-its-kind robust
analysis of the distribution value of VGI (i.e., EV load management, bidirectional charging, and
storage-backed charging). This will ultimately bolster the key findings related to TE impacts on
the grid and provide a dynamic, accurate picture of the available tools in the high DER toolkit.
B. The Commission should consider contracting an independent evaluator to
ensure the IOUs provide consistent data quality and transparency for the Part 2
Study.
VGIC reiterates its appreciation for the work done by the Commission and Kevala staff
on the Part 1 Study. Notwithstanding the data quality issues, VGIC believes that the work
performed on the Part 1 Study is of the highest quality possible. While VGIC believes the IOUs
made their best efforts in providing quality and complete data to Kevala for the Part 1 Study, it’s
evident that Kevala encountered multiple issues with missing, and inconsistent data while
conducting their analysis. As identified by Kevala in the EIS Part 1 Study report, the challenges
3 Inputs & Assumptions, 2022-2023 Integrated Resource Planning (IRP), June 2023.
https://www.cpuc.ca.gov/-/media/cpuc-website/divisions/energy-division/documents/integrated-resource-
plan-and-long-term-procurement-plan-irp-ltpp/2023-irp-cycle-events-and-
materials/draft_2023_i_and_a.pdf
4 Id.
4

related to missing or inconsistent data ranged from Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI)
data, which helps to provide a “detailed picture of energy demand over time for a location,” to
interconnection data, which helps model “existing PV and BESS systems.”5 Most notably, with
the interconnection dataset, “about 80% of the records were missing the energy rating.”6
It is of the utmost importance that the quality and completeness of the data used for the
Part 1 Study improves to the extent feasible before commencing the Part 2 Study. While VGIC
understands the difficulties regarding the logistics of gathering substantial data, the inputs used
in the Part 2 Study must be of higher quality and completeness in order to yield the most
meaningful findings. Given that the result of any analysis is highly dependent on the input data
quality, addressing the key issues Kevala encountered in the first part of the study will be a key
factor in the value and usefulness of the Part 2 Study. This being said, VGIC urges the
Commission to consider contracting an independent evaluator to ensure the IOUs provide
consistent data quality and transparency for the Part 2 Study. VGIC believes this will not only
provide better insight as to where deficiencies exist in regard to data availability but will also
ensure a more accurate, useful, and prudent Part 2 Study.
C. The EIS Part 2 Study should ensure a wide set of non-wires solutions and load
mitigation strategies are considered.
VGIC believes that deploying non-wires solutions and load mitigation strategies will be
key in preparing California’s grid for a high DER future. Moreover, given the increasing number
of EVs on the road, California’s ambitious TE goals, and the rapidly emerging managed charging
technologies for EVs (i.e., software- and hardware-based solutions), it is a must that these
5 EIS Part 1 Study, pg. 142-144.
6 Ibid.
5

mitigation strategies are accounted for in the Part 2 Study and when planning for infrastructure
investments. Without considering an adequate diversity of VGI technologies, the Part 1 Study
found that the “system-level peak load increase from 2025 to 2035 is 56%, on average, across the
three IOUs and High Transportation Electrification scenarios”7 and the significant increase in
peak demand was mainly due to TE impacts. Thus, it is pivotal that, at a minimum, software- and
hardware-based solutions to manage EV charging load specifically for local grid constraints (i.e.,
as opposed to system-level needs), including:
• Platforms to manage EV charging load on the distribution system, including at the
secondary / transformer level.
• Site-level EV load management utilizing power-sharing software across several
chargers at a single customer site.
• Storage-backed EV charging and DER-paired EV charging.
D. The EIS Part 2 Study should include specific recommendations to help advance
pilots and programs that can mitigate the cost impacts determined in EIS Part 1
Study.
EIS Part 1 indicated the severe costs to inaction when building out the distribution grid to
meet California’s policy goals, and VGIC posits these costs are intolerable to ratepayers. The
EIS Part 2 Study offers an opportunity to quantify the potential cost mitigation opportunity
through load management solutions and, critically, to detail specific policy recommendations to
advance and operationalize these solutions. Specifically, VGIC urges the Kevala team to analyze
recommendations for enhancements to California’s existing demand response and EV load
management frameworks. For example, the Commission has not detailed the process for utilities
to propose new VGI programs, and the utilities have not proposed large-scale EV load
7 EIS Part 1 Study, pg. ES-6
6

management programs that leverage VGI solutions. While VGIC welcomes additional and
refined distribution planning process recommendations, as provided in EIS Part 1, we believe
these are of limited value without directly-linked, actionable recommendations to enhance or add
programs and pilots offering infrastructure cost mitigation opportunities. We recognize the
Commission has invested time in a unified, dynamic rate design vision and has principally
committed to seeking precise load flexibility in response to real-time system needs through rates.
However, capturing the benefits of avoiding investments and operations and maintenance costs
for the downstream distribution infrastructure identified by the Kevala team, including secondary
service and transformer upgrades, is challenging for rate design on its own. VGIC urges the
continued assessment and pursuit of programmatic solutions to ensure high load flexibility and
customer resource response with low complexity and administrative burden. The EIS Part 2
study offers a critical opportunity to assess and recommend next steps related to the portfolio of
programs and pilots to mitigate the cost impacts determined in EIS Part 1.
III. COMMENTS ON EIS PART 1 STUDY.
A. The IOUs should increase their DPP planning horizon.
The Part 1 Study recommended that Pacific Gas and Electric (“PG&E”), Southern
California Edison Company (“SCE”), and San Diego Gas and Electric (“SDG&E”) should
increase the planning horizon for their distribution planning fillings to better align with the
California Energy Commission’s (“CEC”) IEPR planning horizon (i.e., 15 years) and the
California Independent System Operator’s (“CAISO”) transmission planning horizons (i.e., 10
7

years for annual planning and 20 years for transmission outlook).8 VGIC agrees with Kevala’s
recommendation to increase the IOUs’ DPP planning horizon to better align with other state
planning initiatives, such as the CEC’s IEPR.
As identified in the Part 1 Study, the “system-level peak load increase from 2025 to 2035
is 56%, on average, across the three IOUs and High Transportation Electrification scenarios”.9
This significant increase in system-level peak load was estimated in the study by looking further
out than the current IOUs’ DPP planning horizon (i.e., 15 years instead of 10 years), and given
that the state has set course to end sales of internal combustion passenger vehicles by 2035,10 and
the main purpose of R.21-06-017 being to “prepare the electric grid for a high number of
distributed energy resources, including those specific to transportation electrification,”11 it’s
evident that there is a disconnect between the timing of the current DPP planning horizon and the
potential grid investments needed over the longer term to prepare the grid for a high number of
DERs.
Moreover, in order to cost-effectively mitigate the impacts associated with the high
electrification scenarios, distribution investment deferrals (e.g., DERs as an alternative to
infrastructure capital investments) need to be effectively identified and utilized. However, the
current DER planning processes “result in minimal-to-no deferral opportunities being
implemented.”12 For example, a recent evaluation of the IOUs’ DIDF filings found that 2,082
grid needs were identified between the three IOUs in the three DIDF cycles spanning from 2020-
2022. Of those 2,082 grid needs identified, 1,457 were planned investments, and of those, only
8 EIS Part 1 Study, pg. 121.
9 EIS Part 1 Study, pg. ES-6.
10 Executive Order N-79-20
11 CPUC R.21-06-017, pg. 2.
12 EIS Part 1 Study, pg. 121.
8

140 were identified as distribution investment deferral candidates, while only a mere 5 were
actually procured and interconnected through DIDF.13 Furthermore, the evaluation also
determined that the primary driver of the significant reduction in candidate deferrals between the
planned investments stage (i.e., 1,457 identified) and the candidate deferral stage (i.e., 140
identified), “is the mismatch in distribution grid needs planning and DER eligibility time
horizons.”14 This timing mismatch hinders the ability to consider and procure distribution
investment deferrals properly, and increasing the DPP planning horizon could help mitigate this
mismatch.
For the aforementioned reasons, VGIC supports EIS’s recommendation that the IOUs
should increase the planning horizon for their distribution planning fillings to align with the
CEC’s IEPR planning horizon and the CAISO’s transmission planning horizons.
B. The IOUs should integrate policy-based demand scenarios into annual DPP and
GNA/DDOR filings.
Based on the Part 1 Study results, it was recommended that the IOUs incorporate
additional policy-based demand scenarios into their DPPs and annual GNA/DDOR filings. VGIC
believes that the recommendation made by the Part 1 Study is appropriate for several reasons.
Firstly, considering that the Part 1 Study estimated that the increase in system-level peak load is
mainly a result of TE, it’s important to fully consider and incorporate EV deployment and EV
load management into the IOU planning processes. This can be achieved by incorporating
policy-based demand scenarios (e.g., EV Time-of-Use rate and managed charging program
13 Distribution Investment Deferral Framework: Evaluation and Recommendations
Kevala, Inc., November 2022. pg. 2-3.
14 Distribution Investment Deferral Framework: Evaluation and Recommendations Kevala, Inc., pg. 2.
“grid needs and planned investments are mostly identified in the short term by the IOUs (year 3 or
before), while candidate DER deferrals are only eligible to defer grid needs that are four or more years
out in the planning horizon.”
9

participation) into the IOUs’ planning processes to help right-size grid infrastructure in
preparation for a high DER future. California’s state policy goals include fostering EV adoption
and EV load management and bidirectional charging deployment, which must all be considered
in the IOUs’ DPPs and annual GNA/DDOR filings. With this in mind, VGIC agrees with the
recommendation made in the Part 1 Study that additional policy-based demand scenarios should
be integrated into the IOUs’ DPPs and GNA/DDOR filings in an effort to avoid underbuilding
and overbuilding when planning for distribution system infrastructure needs.
C. VGIC supports EIS’s recommendation that the IOUs should estimate secondary
distribution infrastructure grid needs in the GNA/DDOR filings.
In the Part 1 Study, AMI consumption data was leveraged to perform premise-level
modeling of load. As explained in the EIS Part 1 Study report, this modeling was able to estimate
upgrades needed at the service transformer level for all three IOUs based on the different TE
scenarios. However, the Part 1 Study notes that the IOUs should estimate secondary distribution
infrastructure grid needs in their GNA/DDOR filings to avoid any potential bottlenecks
associated with secondary distribution infrastructure upgrades. VGIC agrees that the secondary
distribution infrastructure grid needs must be accounted for when prudently planning for
electrification in the future. To this end, VGIC supports the Part 1 Study recommendation that
the IOUs should estimate secondary distribution infrastructure grid needs in their GNA/DDOR
fillings.
D. VGIC supports EIS’s recommendation to provide additional information about
transmission and sub-transmission constraints and identify where higher voltage
upgrades will be triggered due to distribution demand.
According to the Part 1 Study, the scope of the study focused on “understanding the
impact on the unmitigated load and DER growth in the scenario considered,” but this stopped at
10

the distribution substation level.15 Yet the Part 1 Study highlights the increasing importance of
also understanding the impacts on the transmission and sub-transmission infrastructure when
planning for a high DER future. Moreover, given the current scarcity in transmission capacity
throughout the U.S. electric grid, which has resulted in unworkable interconnection queues for
supply-side resources, and the ambitious TE goals set by the state, it is of the utmost importance
to ensure that a similar situation does not unfold with EV deployment in the future.16 Granted,
transmission interconnection and DER interconnection are different with respect to how each
resource can impact the grid infrastructure at their respective level (i.e., DERs at the distribution
level and wholesale market resources at the transmission level). However, it’s critical to identify
and understand any challenges early on that could negatively impact meeting the state’s TE
goals.
While the distribution system will undoubtedly endure the bulk of the upgrades needed to
accommodate a high DER future, it is equally important to identify and map any transmission
and distribution nodes that will need large infrastructure upgrades and plan accordingly. With
this in mind, VGIC agrees with the Part 1 Study recommendation that the IOUs “should provide
information in the GNA regarding distribution planning areas located in transmission- and sub-
transmission-constrained nodes.”17
15 EIS Part 1 Study, pg. ES-11.
16 FERC NOPR 2022-13470, Improvements to Generator Interconnection Procedures and Agreements.
July 2022. pg. 39934.
17 EIS Part 1 Study, pg. ES-11.
11

IV. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit these comments on the EIS Part 1 Study. We
look forward to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Senior Policy Manager
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: July 28, 2023
12