August 21, 2023
Hon. Michelle L. Phillips
Secretary
New York Public Service Commission
3 Empire State Plaza
Albany, NY 12223-1350
RE: Case 22-E-0236: Proceeding to Establish Alternatives to Traditional Demand-Based
Rate Structures for Commercial Electric Vehicle Charging
Comments of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
on the Load Management Technology Incentive Program
Introduction
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC) is a 501(c)(6) membership-based advocacy
group committed to advancing the role of electric vehicles (“EVs”) and vehicle-grid integration
(“VGI”) through policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the
transition to decarbonized transportation and electric sectors by ensuring the value from EV
deployments and flexible EV charging and discharging is recognized and compensated in
support of achieving a more reliable, affordable, and efficient electric grid. VGIC appreciates the
opportunity to provide comments on the Joint Utilities’ proposed Load Management Technology
Incentive Program (“LMTIP”).
VGIC Supports the Proposed LMTIP for Near-Term Implementation
Demand management technologies1 (“DMTs”) are important strategies to help advance
New York’s transportation electrification goals while minimizing impacts to ratepayers.
Specifically, DMTs can reduce charging customers’ electric service requirements and, in doing
so, reduce the cost to ratepayers and optimize the use of utility make-ready funding to support a
greater number of charging sites. Using DMT to reduce utility infrastructure may also accelerate
site connection timelines by reducing the scope of service connection. This makes charging
1 VGIC referred to the same set of technologies and strategies as “Automated Load Management” in our previous
comments. We use the term “demand management technologies” here to align with language used by Staff and the
Joint Utilities.

infrastructure available more quickly to serve the fast-growing number of EVs on the road.
VGIC appreciates the Joint Utilities’ efforts in developing a first-of-its-kind program in New
York state to incentivize the deployment of DMTs and supports the proposed LMTIP for near-
term implementation.
Particularly, VGIC supports the Joint Utilities inclusion of broad eligibility guidelines for
the LMTIP. There are many approaches – both hardware and software – to managing the demand
and site connection requirement of charging sites, and the Joint Utilities’ proposal to allow “all
demand management technologies capable of reliably balancing, curtailing, or deferring a
customer’s net EV charging demand on the electric grid” to participate will ensure the inclusion
of diverse approaches to deliver the same service to the grid and allow customers to choose the
approach that best fits their needs. Additionally, the proposed incentive levels would help offset
a significant portion of the costs of DMTs and would greatly improve the economic case for
customers to install DMTs, benefiting the customers installing DMTs themselves as well as
ratepayers in general.
The proposed LMTIP is reasonable as a first step as the Joint Utilities gain familiarity
with DMTs. However, the proposed approach to the program may not be the best way to
incentivize the deployment of DMTs in the long term, as detailed below in the final section of
VGIC's comments. The proposed method to determine incentive levels is administratively
burdensome, requiring the utilities to determine the costs of DMTs for individual projects. As
explained by the Joint Utilities in their filing, the costs of some DMTs can be ambiguous – such
as when software-based load management costs are part of a software package that also includes
other services, or when energy storage is integrated directly into the EVSE rather than a separate
piece of equipment. This limitation may also introduce uncertainty for the site host and/or
technology provider as to the amount of incentive they can expect to be eligible for under the
LMTIP, affecting calculations for project economics. With this in mind, the proposed LMTIP
approach will be an important exploration of DMTs and potential incentive structures to support
deployment, however, long-term program development efforts may benefit from consideration of
alternative program designs, detailed below in the final section of VGIC's comments.
DMTs Should Be Permitted to Stack LMTIP Incentives with Other Programs
The LMTIP design appropriately supports the installation of DMTs in a technology-
agnostic manner. VGIC considers two overall categories of DMTs: software-based DMTs (e.g.,
power-sharing software used to manage load at a multi-charger site) and hardware-based DMTs (
e.g., using co-located or integrated stationary energy storage solutions to manage load). As
proposed, the LMTIP would enable software-based DMTs to support system-level benefits
through enrollment in managed charging programs. VGIC acknowledges that hardware-based

DMTs may be more expensive relative to software-based DMTs in many cases. However, it is
also true that hardware-based DMTs offer a different set of grid and customer benefits than
software-based DMTs. For example, hardware-based DMTs utilizing stationary energy storage
can provide backup power to the site and support the grid in manners similar to standalone
energy storage systems. As such, VGIC recommends that hardware-based DMTs participating in
LMTIP be deemed eligible to dual participate in existing or future incentive programs, rates, or
market participation pathways that are used to support standalone stationary energy storage
systems. This will help unlock the suite of benefits that hardware-based DMTs offer. Moreover,
this approach will ensure fairness in the DMT marketplace as both software- and hardware-based
DMTs will be eligible to participate in programs other than LMTIP.
The Joint Utilities Should Establish a Unified Approved Products List and Incentive Cap
As proposed, each utility will decide on technology eligibility for the LMTIP, which
could result in one utility accepting a product while another does not. VGIC respectfully urges
the Commission to direct the joint utilities to establish and maintain a single statewide approved
products list for the LMTIP. First, this would be consistent with the Charge Ready program
eligible charging equipment and network providers list, which is hosted on NYSERDA’s Charge
NY website. Second, this would support fleet operators and other charging providers that plan,
install, and manage locations across different service territories in New York. VGIC offers itself
as a resource to work with Joint Utilities, Department of Public Service staff, and the Public
Service Commission in the development of a statewide approved products list for the LMTIP.
Similarly, the downstate and upstate utility LMTIP proposals differ in the level of
incentive available as a percentage of total project costs. The upstate proposal caps incentives at
50% of costs, whereas the downstate proposal caps incentives at 90% of costs. VGIC
respectfully requests the Commission direct the joint utilities to offer a unified cap of 90% of
costs, to ensure consistent treatment for customers and DMT providers operating across different
service territories. This would significantly cut down on soft costs for these actors, who are
already faced with complex program rules and newly established processes for charger
installation and connection.
The Commission Should Consider A Per-Project Cost Cap for the LMTIP
The LMTIP will be an important first step in establishing a sustainable, long-term
paradigm for supporting demand-reducing technologies at EV charging sites. As such, it is
important that the LMTIP supports a variety of customers, technologies, and locations, and that
initial installations under the program can yield important lessons learned for future large-scale

program design. With this in mind, VGIC recommends that a per-project cost cap be
implemented, which will help to stretch the program budget to support more sites, customer
types, and technology types and, in turn, important best practices to inform long-term, large-
scale program development.
Future Iterations of the LMTIP Could Consider a Prescriptive Dollar-per-kW Incentive
The Joint Utilities recommend that the Commission establish a process to determine the
future of the LMTIP prior to the exhaustion of the repurposed PPI program budget. At that point,
VGIC recommends that the Commission require the Joint Utilities to explore a program that
provides a prescriptive dollar-per-kW incentive, commensurate with the demand reduction and
infrastructure cost savings resulting from the overall installation of DMTs. Under this approach,
customers would receive a rebate based on a prescribed dollar-per-kW amount for the difference
between the cumulative nameplate EVSE capacity and site connection requirement. The per-kW
incentive amount would be based on infrastructure costs avoided by DMT installations overall –
such as the costs associated with installing EVSE across each service territory or a few specific
local load pockets, regardless of the specific DMT the customer elects. The customer installing
DMT would be eligible for a portion of the cost savings enabled by their DMT installation, with
the remainder benefiting all ratepayers. For example, if the average cost for EVSE installation is
$1,000 per kW, and the customer installs DMT to reduce 100 kW in total nameplate EVSE
capacity to 80 kW site connection requirement, then the cost savings enabled by the DMT
installation is $20,000. Assuming a cost-share share ratio of 80/20 as an example, the customer
would be eligible for a $16,000 incentive, while ratepayers would benefit from $4,000 in savings
and/or unspent program budget that can be used for more EVSE.
This prescriptive incentive approach, modeled after widely used energy efficiency
programs that avoid the need for individual site-based assessments, has several benefits
compared to the proposed LMTIP. First, a set dollar-per-kW incentive would reduce
administrative burden by avoiding the need for utilities to determine the DMT costs for each
individual site. Second, the predictable amount of incentive would be straightforward for
customers to plan for during the site design process. Lastly, setting the incentive levels based on
the demand reduction and infrastructure cost savings enabled by DMTs would ensure that
customers are rewarded equally for delivering the same grid benefits, meaning that the program
would incentivize the installation of the most cost-effective load management strategies. VGIC
offers itself as a resource for the Commission and the Joint Utilities to help develop the specifics
of such a program.

Conclusion
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments and looks forward to
working with the Joint Utilities , the Commission, and other stakeholders to ensure the success of
New York’s transportation electrification efforts.
Respectfully submitted,
Ed Burgess
Senior Policy Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
(510) 665-7811
www.vgicouncil.org