February 6, 2023
CPUC Energy Division Tariff Unit
505 Van Ness Avenue
San Francisco, California 94102
EDTariffUnit@cpuc.ca.gov
Re: Protest of the Vehicle Grid Integration Council to Joint Advice Letter 6826-
E of Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Advice Letter 4950-E of Southern
California Edison Company, and Advice Letter 4142-E of San Diego Gas
and Electric Company
Dear Sir or Madam:
Pursuant to the provisions of General Order 96-B, the Vehicle Grid Integration Council
(“VGIC”) hereby submits this Protest to the above-referenced Joint Advice Letter 6826-E of
Pacific Gas and Electric Company, (“PG&E”), Advice Letter 4950-E of Southern California
Edison (“SCE”) Company, and Advice Letter 4142-E of San Diego Gas and Electric Company
(“SDG&E”), Joint Submittal of Proposed Modifications to the Emergency Load Reduction
Program Pilot Pursuant to Decision 21-03-056, Decision 21-12-015 and Decision 21-12-069
(“Joint Advice Letter”) submitted on January 17, 2023.
I. INTRODUCTION.
Decision (“D.”) 21-12-015 detailed several critical updates to the Emergency Load Reduction
Program (“ELRP”) pilot, including expanding ELRP to include customer group A.5 for Electric
Vehicle (“EV”)/Vehicle-Grid Integration (“VGI”) Aggregations. In adopting these updates, the
Commission recognized the critical need for a dedicated VGI Aggregation customer group and
took bold action in establishing ELRP Group A.5. In just a few months between the finalization
of these ELRP updates and the end of Summer 2022, a limited amount of V2G capacity was able
to come online and, once utilities were fully set up to leverage this customer group, it did contribute
to California’s grid during the September Labor Day heat wave. VGIC remains hopeful that ELRP
can support meaningful EV contributions to summer reliability in 2023 and beyond. However, key
elements of the proposed modifications detailed in the Joint Advice Letter would put the EV/VGI
Aggregation customer group in jeopardy and work against the program’s overall goals.
California’s electric reliability challenges loom again as the state is likely to experience yet another
summer plagued by extreme weather events, which may become the new normal due to the impacts

February 6, 2023
Page 2 of 8
of global climate change. With this in mind, the CPUC, utilities, and aggregators must use every
obtainable tool to reduce peak demand and increase supply. EVs offer a no-regrets, widely
available asset class that should be leveraged in pursuit of grid reliability. ELRP must, therefore,
remain a key driver for California’s VGI market, which currently has no other mass-market
offering for customers.1 Moreover, any modifications necessary to support the continued success
of the ELRP EV/VGI Aggregation subgroup must be considered and implemented in a timely
fashion to support Summer 2023 reliability needs. As such, VGIC kindly requests the Commission
and Energy Division staff expedite the review and resolution process for the Joint Advice Letter,
to the extent feasible.
In reviewing the Joint Advice Letter, VGIC believes the proposed modification to the minimum
dispatch requirement lacks sufficient justification and could undermine the clear intent of D.21-
12-015 to spur the relatively nascent approach to unlocking EVs as grid assets. VGIC also believes
the modifications for 2023 should include shifting from year-end to monthly payments to remain
consistent with other utility program offerings and alleviate undue financial stress on participating
aggregators and customers. In addition, the Joint Advice Letter correctly identifies that dual
participation should be permitted, but the Commission should ensure emerging dynamic rates also
permit dual participation. Lastly, the SCE-specific modification to transition Charge Ready
customers to ELRP lacks sufficient detail to understand how it may impact customers. However,
we believe these deficiencies can be remedied through the following changes:
• The maximum dispatch amount for EV/VGI Aggregators (Group A.5) should be
adjusted from 60 hours to 150 hours, as consistent with SDG&E’s Power Your Drive
VGI Pilot Rate.
• ELRP compensation should occur in the month where incremental load reductions
(“ILR”) are recorded or the following billing cycle, not at the end of the year.
• Dual participation should be permitted with IOU Direct Enrolled DR programs, but the
Commission should also ensure approved, pending, and yet-to-be-developed dynamic
rates permit dual participation per D.21-12-015.
• SCE should clarify whether Charge Ready customers will be transitioned to Group A.5
or another ELRP customer group. If the former, SCE should clarify its role in
facilitating the aggregator-customer relationship and updating its approved product list.
1 Comments of VGIC on Proposed Decision on TE Policy and Investment. Page 2.
https://www.vgicouncil.org/s/Comments-of-VGIC-on-TE-Policy-and-Investment-PD-R18-12-006.pdf

February 6, 2023
Page 3 of 8
II. REDUCING THE MINIMUM DISPATCH TO 10 HOURS WOULD SEVERELY
HAMSTRING GROUP A.5 INCREMENTAL LOAD REDUCTION. INSTEAD,
THE 60-HOUR CAP SHOULD BE REPLACED WITH A 150-HOUR CAP.
VGIC reiterates that ELRP remains the only large-scale driver for EV/VGI aggregation in
California, in either managed charging (“V1G”) or bidirectional vehicle-to-everything (“V2X”)
modes. Customers and aggregators alike are eager to expand their capabilities within the state
based on the $2/kWh ELRP compensation rate and 30-hour minimum dispatch provision for Group
A.5. The Joint Advice Letter details that during Summer 2022, Flex Alerts were used as the trigger
for Group A.5 dispatch signals, which led to a concern in late August that the 60-hour dispatch
cap would be reached during the September heat wave, which could leave no hours left for dispatch
in October. The Joint Advice Letter concludes that to address the concern of hitting the 60-hour
cap on dispatch, ELRP should be modified to reduce the 30-hour minimum dispatch to 10 hours.
VGIC does not believe the Joint Advice Letter provides adequate justification for this request,
implying that CAISO’s Energy Emergency Alert (“EEA”) dispatch signals may match closer to a
10-hour minimum dispatch. The explanation provided in the Joint Advice Letter conflates the risk
of hitting the dispatch cap with the design of the dispatch minimum. Meanwhile, D.21-12-015
made a clear, correct finding that Group A.5 should be subject to a 30-hour dispatch minimum,
recognizing that VGI market development – particularly the V2X market – needs to be spurred
during the early stages of VGI technology deployment. VGIC is concerned that reducing the
minimum dispatch to 10 hours would significantly undermine this goal. Doing so without
sufficient justification sends a clear signal to customers and technology providers that California
has rescinded its commitment to deploy and utilize beneficial VGI solutions.
Moreover, the proposed modification to reduce minimum dispatch to 10 hours represents a bait-
and-switch for customers that have elected to install bidirectional charging systems with the
expectation of 30 hours per year of dispatch. At $2/kWh and 30 hours per year detailed and
advertised through the utility’s ELRP websites, customers made significant equipment
investments which will take longer to pay off if systems are only dispatched 10 hours per year.
To address the utilities’ concern that they may fulfill the 60-hour cap during the season and be left
without dispatch capability in later months, VGIC strongly recommends that this cap be increased
to 150 hours. The second largest VGI implementation in California after ELRP is SDG&E’s VGI
Pilot Rate, which uses a load-based threshold to trigger critical peak pricing (“CPP”) events. The
load-based threshold is based on the prior year’s top 150 system peak hours.2 For ease of
implementation, VGIC recommends that all three IOUs adopt the SDG&E VGI Rate event
2 SDG&E Schedule VGI. Sheet 2. CPUC Sheet No. 37120-E.
https://tariff.sdge.com/tm2/pdf/tariffs/ELEC_ELEC-SCHEDS_VGI.pdf

February 6, 2023
Page 4 of 8
threshold methodology, which is well-established, having been in effect since December 16, 2016,
and does not require any utility-specific calculation since the core metric is system-wide.3
Moreover, CAISO’s load data is readily available and accessible for utilities, aggregators, and
customers alike.
III. ELRP COMPENSATION SHOULD OCCUR IN THE MONTH WHERE
INCREMENTAL LOAD REDUCTIONS (“ILR”) ARE RECORDED OR THE
FOLLOWING BILLING CYCLE, NOT AT THE END OF THE YEAR.
In 2022, utilities distributed ELRP compensation for ILR at the end of the year. Based on our
understanding, this is an unusual approach relative to other utility program offerings in California
and other states. Not only does this lack of standardization risk creating confusion for aggregators
and customers, but it also asks ELRP participants to bear a greater share of the financial burden
while they await payment for the peak reduction services they provided. VGIC believes that
barring any detailed justification for an end-of-year payment, the Commission should modify
ELRP to require monthly compensation for ILR to ensure fairness and promote standardization
across utility program offerings.
IV. DUAL PARTICIPATION SHOULD BE PERMITTED WITH IOU DIRECT
ENROLLED DR PROGRAMS, BUT THE COMMISSION SHOULD ALSO
ENSURE APPROVED, PENDING, AND YET-TO-BE-DEVELOPED DYNAMIC
RATES PERMIT DUAL PARTICIPATION PER D.21-12-015.
The Joint Advice Letter request that dual participation with IOU Direct Enrolled DR programs
(e.g., smart thermostat programs) be permitted if a customer is using submetering. The Joint
Advice Letter argues that this would not cause double counting or double compensation, since
ELRP settlement for these customers is based on submetered load reductions that can be separated
from other demand response recorded at that site. The Joint Advice Letter correctly states that dual
participation is already permitted between ELRP and Base Interruptible Program (“BIP”),
Capacity Bidding Program (“CBP”), CPP rates, and third-party Proxy Demand Response (“PDR”).
VGIC supports this modification but notes that the Commission should act on another significant
3 Pursuant to D.16-01-045 Ordering Paragraph 3.c, SDG&E filed AL 2877-E on March 31, 2016, to establish
Schedule VGI. Energy Division approved Schedule VGI as set forth in Advice Letter 2877-E effective
December 16, 2016.

February 6, 2023
Page 5 of 8
yet reasonable dual participation matter: the treatment of customers participating in both dynamic
rates and ELRP.
Notably, the original Proposed Decision to establish Group A.5 would have prohibited dual
participation in ELRP and dynamic rates, such as PG&E’s Day-Ahead Hourly Real-Time Pricing
(“DAHRTP”), SDG&E’s proposed dynamic pricing pilots (A.21-12-006), and those envisioned
by the CalFUSE framework.4 However, in reviewing the record and revising the Proposed
Decision, the Commission decided the correct path forward was to remove the proposed dual
participation prohibition in its Final Decision (D.21-12-015) and allow dual participation in ELRP
and dynamic rates.5 However, PG&E’s DAHRTP rate, which VGIC understands as the first full-
scale, optional dynamic rate (i.e., non-pilot) offered in California, does not allow for dual
participation with ELRP.
To remain consistent with the Commission’s direction in D.21-12-015, VGIC strongly urges the
Commission to take additional steps in an existing or new proceeding to ensure that forthcoming
dynamic rates allow for dual participation with ELRP. VGIC believes the current ELRP baselining
methodologies are sufficient to determine incremental load reductions (“ILR”) for dynamic rate
customers. However, VGIC believes a near-term, no-regrets solution that will surely avoid double
counting or double compensation would be to allow customers to participate in either ELRP or a
dynamic rate during the ELRP season and then a dynamic rate during non-ELRP months. For
example, a customer could participate in ELRP for the summer and then respond to a dynamic rate
for charging and/or exports during the winter. In the following summer, the customer may opt to
remain on a dynamic rate for charging and/or exports, rather than ELRP.
At a minimum, customers with V2G equipment or storage-backed EV chargers that may be eligible
for certain dynamic rates but ineligible for any export compensation should be permitted to receive
ELRP compensation for exports. Critically, this would in no way constitute double compensation,
as all measured exports are clearly in response to an ELRP signal and no other price or event-
based signal, as the customer would not even be eligible for other price or even-based export
signals. V2G and storage-backed charging customers should be able to provide significantly more
support to California’s grid in the form of peak exports and could do so if dual participation is
permitted.
VGIC’s overarching concern is that the market for V2G and storage-backed charging products and
services is still emerging, and there are very few stable revenue streams available that can help this
4 Proposed Phase 2 Decision Directing Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Southern California Edison
Company, and San Diego Gas & Electric Company to Take Actions to Prepare for Potential Extreme
Weather in the Summer of 2022 and 2023. Mailed October 29, 2021. Attachment 2 at 6.
5 D.21-12-015. Attachment 2 at 6.

February 6, 2023
Page 6 of 8
suite of technologies to develop even further. As noted above, ELRP is the only form of
compensation for V2G solutions in California outside of small-scale pilots and demonstration
projects. Thus, VGIC stresses the importance of optionality so that new market entrants can test
the viability of different operating paradigms and use cases. A market participant might be hesitant
to participate in a promising new rate or program if that meant foreclosing the opportunity to
continue participating in the more well-established ELRP Group A.5.
V. SCE SHOULD CLARIFY WHETHER CHARGE READY CUSTOMERS WILL
BE TRANSITIONED TO GROUP A.5 OR ANOTHER ELRP CUSTOMER
GROUP. IF THE FORMER, SCE SHOULD CLARIFY ITS ROLE IN
FACILITATING THE AGGREGATOR-CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIP AND
UPDATING ITS APPROVED PRODUCT LIST.
The SCE-specific modifications detailed in the Joint Advice Letter describe that Charge Ready
DR Pilot customers will participate in ELRP or another eligible DR program. The Joint Advice
Letter proposes to transition existing SCE Charge Ready L2 sites and default new sites to ELRP.
Notably, SCE also proposed this in A.22-05-004, Application of SCE for Approval of Demand
Response Programs and Budgets for 2023-2027 (“2023-2027 DR Portfolio Application”).
However, neither SCE’s recent 2023-2027 DR Portfolio Application nor the Joint Advice Letter
detail which ELRP customer group will be used.
SCE's Charge Ready and Charge Ready Transport programs remain pivotal in supporting
commercial customers, multi-unit dwellings, and fleets through the transportation electrification
process. Under D.17-12-003, the Commission authorized SCE’s request for a two-year Charge
Ready DR Pilot, which was later extended through 2022. As approved in Advice Letter 4363-E,
Charge Ready DR pilot customers take service under Schedule DR-CPP, which utilizes a CPP
structure with year-round events. VGIC generally supports the proposal to transition SCE Charge
Ready customers to ELRP. However, additional detail on the below items is needed:
 Applicable ELRP Customer Group and Role of VGI Aggregators: It is unclear whether
customers will be transitioned specifically to ELRP customer group A.5 or another
customer group. If customers are transitioned to ELRP customer group A.5, it is unclear
how SCE will facilitate aggregator participation. For example, SCE could provide Charge
Ready customers with a list of existing ELRP customer group A.5 aggregators, and the
customer may choose to engage with an aggregator from that list or an aggregator that is
not on that list. Another potential approach could be for SCE to facilitate connections
between Charge Ready customers and existing or interested Group A.5 aggregators.

February 6, 2023
Page 7 of 8
 Updating Charge Ready to Align with ELRP V2G Equipment Requirements: Charge
Ready and ELRP have different equipment requirements, and SCE should work to align
its Charge Ready requirements with ELRP requirements in order to unlock EV load
reduction and exports. For example, customers installing vehicle-to-grid direct current
(“V2G DC”) EVSE for purposes of ELRP receive a specific exemption under Rule 21:
V2G DC EVSE needs to be certified to UL 1741, but not UL 1741 SA, UL 1741 SB, or
any updated smart inverter standards that may be required in the future under Rule 21. To
ensure Charge Ready customers can meaningfully participate in ELRP, SCE should update
its Charge Ready Approved Product List with all EVSE eligible to participate in ELRP,
including V2G DC EVSE that may interconnect under the UL 1741 SA exemption detailed
in Rule 21.
 Updating Charge Ready to Align with ELRP Submetering and Virtual Aggregation
Pathways: Additionally, ELRP Group A.5 allows for both EVSE submetering and virtual
pairing of separately metered EVSE, while Charge Ready encourages separate metering.
To address this misalignment, SCE should clarify that customers may be eligible for
Charge Ready make-ready/charger rebates if they are using EVSE submetering to
participate in ELRP, rather than installing EVSE on a separate meter. Additionally, Charge
Ready program rules should reflect ELRP rules by clarifying that site load can be virtually
paired with separately metered EVSE to participate in ELRP.
VGIC generally supports the Joint Advice Letter proposal to transition SCE Charge Ready
customers to ELRP, but believes critical clarity is needed on the above items before the
Commission should approve this request.
VI. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit this Protest to the Joint Advice Letter. We look
forward to collaborating with stakeholders on this important initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Ed Burgess
Ed Burgess
Senior Policy Director
Vehicle Grid Integration Council
cc: Sidney Bob Dietz II c/o Megan Lawson, PG&E (PGETariffs@pge.com)
Connor Flanigan, SCE (AdviceTariffManager@sce.com)

February 6, 2023
Page 8 of 8
Tara S. Kaushik c/o Karyn Gansecki, SCE (Karyn.Gansecki@sce.com)
Greg Anderson, SDG&E (GAnderson@sdge.com, SDGETariffs@sdge.com)
Service list of R.20-11-003
Service list of A.17-01-012 et al.
Service List of R.13-09-011