DOCKETED
Docket Number: 22-RENEW-01
Project Title: Reliability Reserve Incentive Programs
TN #: 252103
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council Comments - on Proposed
Document Title:
DEBA Program Guidelines
Description: N/A
Filer: System
Organization: Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
Submitter Role: Public
Submission Date: 8/31/2023 4:50:41 PM
Docketed Date: 8/31/2023

Comment Received From: Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
Submitted On: 8/31/2023
Docket Number: 22-RENEW-01
VGIC's Comments on Proposed DEBA Program Guidelines
Additional submitted attachment is included below.

August 31, 2023
Email to: docket@energy.ca.gov
Docket Number: 22-RENEW-01
Subject: California Energy Commission Proposed Draft Distributed Electricity Backup Assets
Program Guidelines
Re: Comments of the Vehicle Grid Integration Council on the Proposed Draft
Distributed Electricity Backup Assets Program Guidelines
Dear Sir or Madam:
The Vehicle Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) appreciates the opportunity to comment on
the California Energy Commission’s (“CEC”) Proposed Draft Distributed Electricity Backup Assets
(“DEBA”) Program Guidelines. VGIC commends the CEC for its efforts to bolster grid reliability
in the face of increased risk of extreme weather events.
I. INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY.
The Vehicle Grid Integration Council is a 501(c)(6) membership-based trade association
representing 40 companies focused on accelerating the role of smart electric vehicle (“EV”)
charging and discharging through policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC
supports the transition to a decarbonized transportation and electric sector by ensuring the value
from EV deployments and flexible EV charging and discharging is recognized and compensated in
support of a more reliable, affordable, and efficient electric grid.
VGIC strongly believes that the DEBA program is needed to deploy equipment capable of
unlocking real-world load reductions and exports that will meaningfully support the grid during
emergency conditions. To accomplish these goals, the program must fill key gaps in policy and
funding support. With this in mind, VGIC offers the below overarching recommendations to the
CEC:
• DEBA program should transition toward a standard incentive program offering rather
than using a Grant Funding Opportunity (“GFO”) approach to project selection and fund
distribution.
• DEBA eligibility should explicitly list all bidirectional EV chargers and associated
equipment, unidirectional managed charging solutions, and storage-backed managed
charging solutions, rather than using the term “vehicle-to-grid integration.”
• The CEC should clarify that island-only vehicle-to-home (“V2H”) backup power
systems are eligible to receive DEBA funding.

August 31, 2023
Page 2 of 4
II. DEBA PROGRAM SHOULD TRANSITION TOWARD A STANDARD INCENTIVE
PROGRAM OFFERING RATHER THAN USING A GRANT FUNDING
OPPORTUNITY (“GFO”) APPROACH TO PROJECT SELECTION AND FUND
DISTRIBUTION.
VGIC generally supports the proposed DEBA guidelines, as DEBA presents an opportunity
to capture the myriad of benefits available through VGI solutions, which in turn will help achieve
greater reliability for California’s grid. This being said, one immediate action that should be
considered is structuring the DEBA project selection and fund distribution components to enable a
wide range of VGI technologies at a low administrative cost for applicants. Specifically, the CEC
should offer a transparent, accessible incentive program to support constructing these critical
distributed grid resources, rather than conducting Grant Funding Opportunities (“GFO”). GFOs are
administratively burdensome for project developers and site hosts and are a risky endeavor due to
the uncertainty of a given GFO application being awarded CEC funding. In contrast, an incentive
program administered by a third-party, for example CALeVIP or Energiize, would offer a
streamlined, accessible funding source for DEBA projects. In February 2023 comments, VGIC and
other parties recommended a structure and incentive amount to be used in a DEBA rebate program.
VGIC urges the Commission to transition DEBA to a standard incentive program, perhaps
administered by a third party, rather than using the administratively burdensome GFO model.
III. DEBA ELIGIBILITY SHOULD EXPLICITLY LIST ALL BIDIRECTIONAL EV
CHARGERS AND ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT, UNIDIRECTIONAL MANAGED
CHARGING SOLUTIONS, AND STORAGE-BACKED MANAGED CHARGING
SOLUTIONS, RATHER THAN USING THE TERM “VEHICLE-TO-GRID
INTEGRATION.”
With the 1.5 million EVs already on California’s roads, the state stands to benefit immensely
from the increasing opportunities for EVs and EV chargers to provide load reduction and grid
exports. With this in mind, VGIC supports the CEC’s inclusion of VGI as an eligible solution set
for DEBA. However, the term “vehicle-to-grid integration”, as used in the CEC staff’s presentation
on DEBA eligibility, could be misinterpreted to mean only bidirectional charging equipment that
exports power to the grid, which is typically labeled “vehicle-to-grid” or V2G. To avoid confusion
and remain consistent with definitions adopted by the CPUC and used in other CEC funding
opportunities, VGIC recommends the CEC revise its guidelines, presentations, and any other
communications and outreach surrounding DEBA with best practices for VGI solution definitions.
Specifically, CEC should refer to “vehicle-grid integration” as a broad umbrella of eligible DEBA
solutions that explicitly include: (1) vehicle-to-everything (V2X) bidirectional chargers and

August 31, 2023
Page 3 of 4
associated equipment, (2) unidirectional managed charging solutions, and (3) storage-backed
charging solutions. Moreover, DEBA should support VGI solutions in a non-technology-specific
manner, such that chargers of all power levels, charging connectors, communication protocols, and
located on either existing or new utility service drops or meters are eligible to receive support. For
example, the existing list of available V2X bidirectional charging equipment remains relatively
small, so any limitations to technology type or size would significantly constrain the load reduction
and grid export solutions ultimately deployed. This remains a major barrier for the growth of the
V2X market in particular, and VGIC urges the Commission to support the widest reasonable
eligibility rules for bidirectional charging equipment. In sum, defining VGI broadly is consistent
with the intent of DEBA, as it would promote an appropriately large set of VGI solutions and ensure
that both load reduction and grid exports are enabled to support the grid during extreme reliability
events.
IV. THE CEC SHOULD CLARIFY THAT ISLAND-ONLY VEHICLE-TO-HOME
(“V2H”) BACKUP POWER SYSTEMS ARE ELIGIBLE TO RECEIVE DEBA
FUNDING.
VGIC reiterates its support for the CEC including VGI resources in its proposed DEBA
eligibility guidelines, which it believes will be crucial to supporting the grid during extreme events.
However, in addition to our recommendation in Section II above, VGIC also recommends the CEC
explicitly clarify that island-only vehicle-to-home (“V2H”) backup power solutions be included on
the list of technologies eligible for the DEBA program, if not already included. These solutions may
not be certified or configured to export to the grid during these events, however, may be able to
support the grid by meeting a customer’s load during an extreme event by electrically isolating from
the grid using industry-standard transfer switches. VGIC recognizes that this solution may be
considered a behind-the-meter, single-customer microgrid and therefore fall under the “microgrid”
category for DEBA eligibility. However, we believe it would be valuable for the CEC to explicitly
clarify that V2H solutions are eligible for DEBA given the widespread use of that term (rather than
“behind the meter microgrid”) within the EV/VGI industry, customer base, and technical experts.

August 31, 2023
Page 4 of 4
V. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments on the workshop and looks
forward to collaborating with the CEC and other stakeholders in this docket.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Senior Policy Manager
Vehicle Grid Integration Council
Albert Tapia
Policy Analyst
Vehicle Grid Integration Council
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org