BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 24-01-018
Establish Energization Timelines. (Filed January 25, 2024)
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE’S RULING DIRECTING PARTIES TO RESPOND
TO QUESTIONS ON ENERGIZATION ISSUES
Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
10265 Rockingham Dr.
Suite#100-4061
Sacramento, California 95827
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
Date: June 18, 2024

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 24-01-018
Establish Energization Timelines. (Filed January 25, 2024)
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE’S RULING DIRECTING PARTIES TO RESPOND
TO QUESTIONS ON ENERGIZATION ISSUES
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) hereby submits
these comments on the Administrative Law Judge’s Ruling Directing Parties to Respond to
Questions on Energization Issues issued by Administrative Law Judges (“ALJ”) Sasha Goldberg
and Carolyn Sisto on June 6, 2024.
I. INTRODUCTION.
VGIC appreciates the Commission seeking additional comments for consideration to set
the initial timelines for Phase 1 of this proceeding. VGIC is a 501(c)6 membership-based advocacy
group committed to advancing the role of electric vehicles (“EV”) and vehicle-grid integration
(“VGI”) through policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the
transition to a decarbonized transportation and electric sector by ensuring the value from flexible
EV charging and discharging is recognized and compensated to achieve a more reliable,
affordable, and efficient electric grid. There are many broad issues that need to be addressed to
unlock the decarbonized future that California envisions. These are not in scope for the initial
timelines being set in Phase 1 of this proceeding, but, as VGIC and other parties have commented,
there should be robust consideration of additional items in Phase 2, including flexible service
2

connections and other solutions to allow for quicker energization and additional VGI within the
timelines that will be set.
In this set of comments, VGIC responds to the questions outlined by the Ruling. These
responses are based on the experiences and data from VGIC membership. We would like to caveat
that many VGIC members actively implement VGI strategies, including managed charging
platforms, automated load management (“ALM”) / flexible service connection technologies,
bidirectional charging equipment, and the use of behind-the-meter (“BTM”) generation and energy
storage technologies to reduce the costs of transportation electrification. Therefore, VGIC
members may concurrently process an energization application for electric vehicle (“EV”)
chargers (i.e., under Rule 15/16 or Rule 29/45) and generator interconnection (i.e., under Rule 21).
For these projects, both processes impact the customer experience in getting their EV charger
operational. While VGIC understands that this proceeding is only looking at the energization of
new load, we reiterate our recommendations made throughout this proceeding that the Commission
should consider how these timelines and processes interact with Rule 21 and track instances where
Rule 21 applications are being submitted in conjunction with energization applications.
II. Question 1: Please provide the time necessary for different energization steps for
project(s) related to your industry using the five steps described below.
a. Customer Initiation/Intake (energy service upgrade or new service line
application filing and IOU acceptance)
b. Engineering & Design (IOU review of project and proposal for completion)
c. Dependencies (fulfillment of local jurisdictional requirements, permitting,
customer response to IOU’s requests)
d. Site Readiness (evaluation of work necessary to complete the engineering design
and customer availability for work to begin)
e. Construction (length of time necessary for IOU and/or contractors to complete
construction of the project)
VGIC does not have specific recommendations on the time necessary to complete these
various steps in the energization process, nor do we have recommendations on how these should
3

flow through to the timelines set in Phase 1. However, we do want to share information for the
Commission to consider when setting Phase 1 timelines.
● Energization timelines are slowing: VGIC members have reported that energization
timelines from beginning to end have increased significantly since 2020, more than
doubling in these past four years. Given this recent trend, VGIC cautions against over-
relying on the current utility average timelines to set future goals.
● Utilities do not always start subsequent energization steps in a timely manner: The
Commission should consider not only the timelines for completing individual steps but
also ensure that each step is started promptly. For example, many utilities have defined
response times for pre-construction engineering activities, typically 30 days. However, in
many cases, the utility will not acknowledge receipt of information from a developer until
the end of the 30-day window and will subsequently request additional information,
triggering an additional 30-day review period.
● Significant delays at the final step of Construction are becoming more common: VGIC
members have shared that the final stage of energization, between completion of
construction on the customer side and the final energization or permission to operate, has
increased significantly over the past four years. Many times, developers and customer
contractors are responsible for the installation of EV chargers, and these chargers can be
fully finished and sit unenergized while the utilities finalize their inspections. The increase
in the time for this final step is responsible for a significant portion of the overall timeline
increases seen by VGIC members.
III. Question 2: Please provide the time necessary for different upstream capacity
project(s) related to your industry using the three project types defined below.
4

Identify which steps have required incremental time from the IOU involved and
include additional project types as necessary.
a. New and upgraded circuit (could be a new service line, or an upgrade to an
existing service line)
b. Upgrade Substation (upgrading a substation to support new or upgraded service
for one or more new/upgrade service requests)
c. New Substation (building a whole new substation to support new or upgraded
service for one or more new/upgrade service requests).
VGIC does not have specific recommendations on the time necessary to complete
distribution capacity upgrade projects.
IV. Question 3: Are there data on timelines for specific upstream capacity projects,
beyond what the IOUs have provided, that should be utilized for Phase 1 issues?
a. If so, what are those sources?
b. Please attach PDFs of any sources used to support your responses to this ruling.
VGIC does not have specific recommendations on timelines for upstream capacity projects.
V. Question 4: What issues have you encountered when seeking permits or other
approvals from local permitting authorities in California that have delayed
energization projects?
a. Please outline any reason(s) that delayed your project, the extent of the delay, and
how many instances you experienced this type of delay.
b. Please break out your response by individual instances if you have experienced
delays for multiple projects and/or in multiple local jurisdictions.
Overall, VGIC agrees that local permitting exacerbates the length of project timelines. We
believe that the utilities do have significant portions of the timelines within their control, but
acknowledge that the local Authorities Having Jurisdiction (“AHJs”) can create additional and
compounding delays. Generally, permitting delays, like utility delays, are caused by difficulties in
communication - jurisdictions are often hard to reach and unresponsive. It can take months to
schedule an appointment for intake and another month or two for the initial reviews to be complete.
Additionally, even after permits are approved, the permits can take 2-3 weeks to be issued. This
can be found across various jurisdictions, but the urban jurisdictions in the Bay Area and Greater
5

Los Angeles were highlighted among VGIC membership as being particularly difficult and, as the
state’s urban centers, are where a significant share of EV chargers are being installed.
Another issue contributing to project delays with AHJs is inconsistent information
regarding permit requirements. It can be hard to navigate what is required for each jurisdiction,
and the permitting processes can change due to design modifications like changing the point of
interconnection, which adds supplemental reviews to the process. It is difficult to know which
design changes will trigger various supplemental reviews and paired with a general lack of
communication, this creates significant delays.
VI. Question 5: Are there any specific geographical concerns related to energization in
California? If so, please describe the issues and the geographical area(s) where they
are of concern.
VGIC has no comment.
VII. Question 6: How should the Commission be made aware of energization issues
moving forward? Should there be a dedicated webpage and/or reporting place
overseen by a third party or would the Commission’s website be sufficient?
VGIC has no comment.
VIII. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments on Phase 1 of this
proceeding. We look forward to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on
this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: June 18, 2024
6