June 25, 2024
CPUC Energy Division Tariff Unit
505 Van Ness Avenue
San Francisco, California 94102
EDTariffUnit@cpuc.ca.gov
Re: Comments of the Vehicle Grid Integration Council to Resolution E-5326:
Approval, with modifications, of the rate design for Phase II of the Pacific
Gas and Electric Company VGI Pilots RTP rate proposed in Advice Letter
6694-E.
Dear Sir or Madam:
Pursuant to General Order 96-B and the Comment Letter accompanying Draft Resolution
E-5326 (“Draft Resolution”), the Vehicle Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) respectfully
comments on the proposed approval of the Advice Letter (“AL”) 6694-E of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company (“PG&E”) submitted on September 2, 2022.
The Draft Resolution approves several rate design elements important to the launch of
Phase II of PG&E’s Vehicle-Grid Integration (“VGI”) Pilots. VGIC appreciates the Commission’s
continued efforts to implement Senate Bill (“SB”) 676, which directs the Commission to “establish
strategies to maximize the use of feasible and cost-effective EV integration into the electric grid
by January 1, 2030.”1 As the five-year anniversary of SB 676 and the four-year anniversary of
Decision (“D.”) 20-12-029 implementing SB 676 fast approach, and the 2030 deadline for
maximizing VGI draws near, VGI programs remain limited in scope and scale. The Commission
must accelerate support for the state’s VGI goals, particularly given rising concerns about customer
energy affordability. VGIC believes the Draft Resolution is generally consistent with the 2030 goal
and the needs of VGI customers and ratepayers more broadly.
VGIC generally supports the Draft Resolution and offers one recommended modification
below to ensure customers have more than one choice for export compensation. VGIC does not
believe our recommendation requires any delay to the planned July 11, 2024 Commission vote or
the subsequent Phase II launch.
1. VGIC Recommends a Path Forward That Would Provide VGI Pilot Participants
with a TOU Export Rate Option Without Compromising Pilot Goals or the
Commission’s Broader RTP Initiative
1 Public Utilities Code Section 740.16.

June 25, 2024
Page 2 of 7
Resolution E-5192 directs PG&E to offer both a dynamic real-time pricing (“RTP”) option
and a static time-of-use (“TOU”) export option. However, the Draft Resolution offers a different
directive, stating “the proposed RTP rate can provide cost-based export compensation for the VGI
Pilots customers”2 and claims that PG&E did not provide sufficient evidence in the AL to authorize
a TOU option at this time.
First, as a matter of process, VGIC posits that the ~20-month gap between the filing of the
AL and the release of the Draft Resolution would have been enough time for PG&E to be alerted
to this deficiency and subsequently address it via a Supplemental Advice Letter. VGIC is
disappointed that an “absence of sufficient evidence” is cited as one of two reasons why a TOU
export credit will not be authorized at this time. VGIC respectfully requests that the Energy
Division staff and Commission work proactively with the investor-owned utilities in the future to
address similar deficiencies, especially for suspended Advice Letters experiencing lengthy delays
between submission and disposition/resolution.
The Draft Resolution offers another reason why the TOU option should not be authorized.
The Draft Resolution asserts that it is reasonable for PG&E to offer only the dynamic rate option
for its VGI Pilots to:
“…effectively achieve the policy goals of (1) maximizing the learnings and benefits from
the ratepayer funds authorized for the VGI Pilots, and (2) ensuring that VGI Pilots
customers are compensated for their exports in a manner that is aligned with the CPUC’s
adopted Rate Design and Demand Flexibility Design Principles.”3
While these are worthy policy objectives that VGIC generally supports, neither D.20-12-029 nor
Resolution E-5192 require customers enrolled in the VGI Pilots to be compensated for exports in
a manner that is aligned with the CPUC’s Demand Flexibility Design Principles. Using the
Demand Flexibility Design Principles as justification for eliminating the static TOU export rate
option is inappropriate given that the Demand Flexibility Design Principles, although important,
are not defined goals of the VGI Pilots in Resolution E-5192. VGIC recommends that the
Commission remove this language from the Draft Resolution.
Moreover, this reference to and reliance on the Demand Flexibility Design Principles is
concerning. PG&E’s VGI Pilots, which were a direct result of SB 676 and intended from inception
to maximize VGI opportunities, seem to have been superseded by the Commission's broader
demand flexibility efforts. VGIC strongly supports aligning transportation electrification (“TE”)
efforts and demand flexibility efforts and believes that demand flexibility strategies like RTP are
an important element of maximizing the VGI potential. However, adopting a new framework for
success and applying a new set of goals for the VGI Pilots to meet at this late stage overlooks the
express purpose and importance of the VGI Pilots. The VGI Pilots were never designed to be
2 Draft Resolution at 8.
3 Draft Resolution at 8.

June 25, 2024
Page 3 of 7
exclusively or even primarily an RTP experiment; they were established to spur the vehicle-to-
everything (“V2X”) market and maximize VGI pursuant to SB 676.
Notwithstanding these concerns, VGIC agrees that the RTP option has the potential to
benefit customers, support the grid, and help achieve the VGI Pilot goals. However, we believe
there is still value in offering a TOU option, which could be attractive to certain customers. We
offer additional details and a recommended path forward in the sections below.
a. Customers Should be Provided a Menu of V2X Compensation Choices.
In its approval of this Draft Resolution and similar policy innovation efforts, the
Commission must balance the benefits of providing clear regulatory signals to market actors and
maintaining momentum on its policy initiatives with the risks of policy lock-in and path
dependency toward relatively under deployed rate designs. In the case of the VGI Pilots, the
Commission is “putting all its eggs in one basket” by eliminating the option of a static TOU export
credit in favor of a single export compensation design.
To this end, VGIC believes that several export compensation options should be made
available to customers to increase the likelihood of achieving the VGI Pilot customer enrollment
goal of 1,200 customers. EV customers have a diverse set of needs and serve a variety of use cases
characterized by various duty cycles, dwell times, vehicle battery sizes, charge configurations, and
site load characteristics. This diversity is evident in electric vehicle (“EV”) make-ready program
reporting. For example, Southern California Edison’s (“SCE”) Charge Ready Transport shows a
diverse set of site host segments and charger power output:

June 25, 2024
Page 4 of 7
Figure 1. Southern California Edison, Transportation Electrification Program Advisory Council, March 8th, 2024, pg. 12 (Charge
Ready Transport).4
This diversity was also made clear by the 2019-2020 Joint CPUC-CEC VGI Working Group,
which convened over 100 representatives from utilities, state and federal agencies, ISO/RTO,
automakers, charging manufacturers, charge point operators, aggregators, transit agencies,
research institutions, industry associations, environmental nonprofits, consumer groups, ratepayer
advocates, standards development organizations, and other key stakeholders to define, sort, assess
value, and rank 2,500 potential VGI use cases.5 Figure 2 below illustrates the various
“dimensions” of the use case assessment:
4 Southern California Edison, Transportation Electrification Program Advisory Council, March 8th, 2024, pg. 12
(Charge Ready Transport).
5 See Final Report of the VGI Working Group. https://gridworks.org/2020/09/final-report-of-the-
california-joint-agencies-vehicle-grid-integration-vgi-working-group/

June 25, 2024
Page 5 of 7
Given the considerable diversity of relevant use cases, it is beneficial for customers to be given
the choice to participate in the option that best fits their specific needs and internal cost-benefit
calculations.
In the context of the VGI Pilots Phase II, limiting available V2X compensation options
solely to the RTP option, rather than offering both RTP and static TOU options – as initially
directed in Resolution E-5192 – would likely unnecessarily preclude certain eligible customers
from participating in the pilot. Static TOU price signals may better suit some customers' needs,
goals, and technologies. Other customers may be attracted to a dynamic optimization approach
that relies on RTP signals. Yet other customers may seek to not participate in either of these options
and instead favor the capacity payment structure of the CEC Demand Side Grid Support: Option
3 or another non-rate program. There may not be a one-size-fits-all approach to unlocking V2X
capability to support the grid. Just as grid planners seek fuel diversity in the bulk power generation
profile, the Commission should seek V2X strategy diversification. This is especially critical when
considering the relative nascency of the V2X market, where there is a need to prompt initial
customer response from a wide range of new vehicle classes and use cases, customer segments,
charger sizes and types, site hosts, relevant agents and actors, and price sensitivities.
By offering a portfolio of participation options, the Commission and utilities can
experiment with more innovative rate designs, like the RTP approach that would be approved by
the Draft Resolution, while still maintaining the key rate design principles of gradualism,
simplicity, understandability, public acceptability, and feasibility of application. More widely
tested export compensation mechanisms, such as static TOU export rates, can support these rate
design principles. SCE appears to be developing a balanced portfolio of V2X compensation
options, given its recent proposal for a static TOU export rate designed for EV customers.6
Notably, SCE is not proposing to exclude V2X customers from its Phase 2 Dynamic Rate Pilot
(authorized in D.24-01-032), but rather offering both options and allowing customers to choose
6 A.24-03-019. SCE-01 at 25; SCE-04 at 121-138.

June 25, 2024
Page 6 of 7
which works best for them. As detailed in Section 1.c., VGIC recommends PG&E model a TOU
option after SCE’s recent proposal.
b. Offering a TOU Option Would Not Interfere with the Commission’s Broader
Initiative to Surface Key Learnings About RTP Implementation Ahead of the
CEC’s 2027 Load Management Standard.
VGIC appreciates the Commission’s efforts to advance RTP through the CalFUSE
framework and reiterates its general support for this initiative. We believe that offering a static
TOU export credit option in the VGI Pilots Phase II would not negatively impact these broader
RTP efforts, as it will not meaningfully curb the lessons learned from RTP implementation. The
Commission should look to the PG&E and SCE D.24-01-032 expanded dynamic rate pilots rather
than the VGI Pilots Phase II for RTP implementation lessons for two reasons.
First, VGIC believes the expanded dynamic rate pilots authorized in D.24-01-032 will yield
clearer findings about RTP implementation than the VGI Pilots because the latter are more
complex. PG&E and SCE’s D.24-01-032 expanded dynamic rate pilots are technology-agnostic.
As a result, these pilots will see participation from customers with more established technologies
than V2X charging equipment. In contrast, the VGI Pilots Phase II participants will be faced with
not only a new RTP rate design but also new equipment, new upfront incentives, new mobile
applications, and new relationships with vendors. These factors may make it more difficult to
isolate the impact of the RTP rate design on participant behavior in the VGI Pilots compared to the
D.24-01-032 pilots.
Second, the D.24-01-031 dynamic rate pilots will operate at a larger scale than the VGI
Pilots. The expanded dynamic rate pilot implementation budgets exceed $30 million and aim to
achieve 50 MW of load reduction, whereas the VGI Pilots Phase II budgets are around $10 million,
pending resolution on AL 6909-E, and aim to enroll ~1,200 customers. It is reasonable to expect
much clearer trends in evaluating the impact of RTP pricing on the number of customers needed
to yield 50 MW of load reduction than the ~1,200 VGI Pilots Phase II customers.
For these two reasons, VGIC believes the Commission will learn more about RTP
implementation from these pilots than from VGI Pilots Phase II and, as a result, establishing a
TOU option should not be viewed as interfering with the Commission’s broader efforts.
c. Ordering Paragraph 2 Should be Amended to Allow PG&E to Submit a
Proposal to Offer a Cost-Based Static TOU Export Option to New VGI Pilot
Participants by May 1, 2025.
To avoid any further delays to the launch of Phase II, VGIC recommends the Commission
allow PG&E to submit an Advice Letter requesting approval for a cost-based rate design after the
launch of Phase II. VGIC recommends PG&E develop its cost-based static TOU rate structure
using relevant components from the Commission’s Avoided Cost Calculator including GHG cap
and trade (marginal emissions), generation energy, generation capacity, transmission, distribution,

June 25, 2024
Page 7 of 7
ancillary services procurement, and losses. This would offer a straightforward, easy-to-understand,
and cost-based price signal for summer on-peak exports.
The VGI Pilots were initially expected to launch in 2022 and run for three years, and there
have been several delays since the approval of Resolution E-5192. VGIC cannot state for certain
whether VGI Pilots will run past 2025; however, we believe it is useful to plan for this possibility.
VGIC recommends the Commission allow PG&E to propose a cost-based TOU export credit,
effectively correcting the deficiencies in the AL. PG&E should aim to offer this TOU option to
new VGI Pilot participants by May 1, 2025. VGIC posits that ~10 months would be a reasonable
timeline for correcting the initial deficiency and subsequent CPUC disposition/resolution, given
the singular focus of the effort and the foundation provided by SCE’s VGRP. VGIC offers the
following redline to Ordering Paragraph 2 of the Draft Resolution:
“2. PG&E is not authorized to offer a TOU option for Phase II of the PG&E Residential
and Commercial Fleet Vehicle Grid Integration Pilots (VGI Pilots) at this time. PG&E
may file a Tier 2 advice letter within 90 days of the issuance of this Resolution with a
cost-based static TOU export rate structure option. This advice letter shall also
identify the project plan for offering the rate option to new VGI pilot participants by
May 1, 2025.”
Conclusion
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit these comments to the Draft Resolution and
looks forward to future collaboration with the Commission and other stakeholders on this
initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
Vehicle Grid Integration Council
cc: Achintya Madduri, Energy Division (Achintya.Madduri@cpuc.ca.gov)
Paul Phillips, Energy Division (Paul.Phillips@cpuc.ca.gov)
Sidney Bob Dietz II, c/o Stuart Rubio, PG&E (PGETariffs@pge.com)
Chloe Lukins, Public Advocates Office (Chloe.Lukins@cpuc.ca.gov)
Service Lists: R.22-07-005 and A.20-12-011