May 23, 2024
CPUC Energy Division Tariff Unit
505 Van Ness Avenue
San Francisco, California 94102
EDTariffUnit@cpuc.ca.gov
Re: Protest of the Vehicle Grid Integration Council to Advice Letter 5285-E-A
of Southern California Edison Company: Dual Participation in the
Southern California Edison Expanded Dynamic Rate Pilot and Demand
Response Programs
Dear Sir or Madam:
Pursuant to the provisions of General Order 96-B, the Vehicle Grid Integration Council
(“VGIC”) hereby submits this Protest to the above-referenced Supplement to Advice Letter 5285-
E-A of Southern California Edison (“SCE”), Supplement to Advice 5285-E, Dual Participation in
the Southern California Edison Expanded Dynamic Rate Pilot and Demand Response Programs
(“Advice Letter”) submitted on May 14, 2024.
I. INTRODUCTION
In Decision (“D.”) 24-01-032, the Commission directs SCE to propose rules to avoid double
compensation and double counting, and details that in response to the August 15, 2023 Staff
Proposal, “SCE similarly opposed exclusion of customers participating in DR programs from the
SCE Extended Pilot, arguing that this exclusion would hinder participation and limit learnings
from the pilot. SCE argued that dynamic pricing is not DR and is not a market product. SCE
argued that there is no basis under the Commission’s DR dual participation rules for
preventing participation in both DR programs and dynamic rates” (emphasis added).1
Following the March 1, 2024, workshop hosted by SCE and Pacific Gas and Electric (“PG&E”),
SCE filed Advice Letter 5285-E on April 26, 2024, requesting approval for the methods to avoid
double compensation and evaluate impacts for dual participating customers. Advice Letter 5285-
E-A, however, requests to revoke the dual participation option for Emergency Load Reduction
Program, Subgroup A.5 customers. VGIC appreciates the unique challenges SCE faces in enabling
dual participation across these two pilots and commends SCE for its work to propose a
methodology in Advice Letter 5285-E-A initially. However, VGIC details below its grounds for
1 D.24-01-032, pg. 60-61.

May 23, 2023
Page 2 of 6
protest based on legal and factual errors found in Advice Letter 5285-E-A, which aims to relitigate
the clear and explicit Commission intent in D.24-01-032, fails to weigh alternative methodologies
to permit dual participation, injects significant uncertainty into the VGI market during a critical
stage of market development, and overlooks the outsized impact of this proposed prohibition on
certain customers.
II. GROUNDS FOR PROTEST
A. SCE’s Request to Exclude Dynamic Rate Pilot Customers from Dual Participating in
ELRP Subgroup A.5 Violates Commission Decision 24-01-032.
In D.24-01-032, the Commission finds, in no uncertain terms, that “it is reasonable to allow dual-
participation in the expanded pilots and the following tariffs and programs: Critical Peak Pricing,
electrification rates, TOU rates, NEM and NBT, and ELRP Subgroup A.”2 This finding was
preceded by the Commission’s written discussion, which carefully deliberates the thorough record
on the topic and culminates in the Commission’s clear and unwavering intent. Ordering Paragraph
(“OP”) 2 of D.24-01-032 therefore directs SCE to file a Tier 2 advice letter to “propose an
implementation plan to expand the dynamic rate pilot authorized in D.21-12-015 and to apply all
modifications to the pilot authorized in this decision on June 1, 2024.”3 The OP also states that the
SCE must propose “how to address dual participation issues and input from the dual participation
workshop.”4 Advice Letter 5285-E-A, however, directly violates the Commission intent and the
plain language found in D.24-01-032, as it aims to prohibit dual participation between SCE’s
dynamic rate pilot and ELRP Subgroup A.5.
It is worth considering not only the procedural error and precedent violation that the request in
Advice Letter 5285-E-A represents but also the material impact that relitigating this issue has on
the ratepayers and customers meant to benefit from the pilot. Namely, the market for VGI
solutions, including the vehicle-to-everything (“V2X”) manufacturers and aggregators, sits at a
critical juncture in California. V2X solutions offer an immense potential opportunity both in the
immediate term and over the long run to mitigate rising ratepayer costs (i.e., helping to address the
nearly $50 billion of distribution system upgrade costs identified in the Kevala Electrification
Impact Study, Phase 1), lower participating customer bills and, in turn, accelerate transportation
electrification, facilitate renewable energy integration and grid decarbonization, bolster grid
reliability, and support community resiliency. However, the solutions and the ecosystem needed
to enable and operationalize the technology lie at a relatively nascent stage of market development.
In the past, California has gone to great lengths to support market transition for similar
2 D.24-01-032, pg. 64.
3 D.24-01-032, OP 2.
4 Ibid.

May 23, 2023
Page 3 of 6
technologies that can yield many of the same material benefits, including rooftop solar, smart
thermostats, stationary energy storage, and heat pump hot water heaters. Currently, automotive
manufacturers (i.e., “OEMs”), EVSE manufacturers, EV service providers, and other V2X solution
providers are viewing the dynamic rate pilots and ELRP as two critically necessary components
of the “value stack” for their customers. This perception is spurring the necessary investments in
product development, customer acquisition, and technology integration. With this in mind,
relitigating the issue of dual participation across these two critical programs not only represents a
violation of the Commission’s clear Decision but also imposes significant uncertainty and fails to
send the correct regulatory signals to the V2X market. This places market and solution
development in substantial peril and, in turn, jeopardizes the ability of V2X solutions to provide
any benefits for ratepayers and participating customers now or in the future.
B. Advice Letter 5285-E-A Contains Material Omissions, including a Lack of
Consideration of Alternative Methodologies and Impact on Participating Customers.
VGIC reiterates its appreciation for SCE, as well as PG&E, which contributed through the March
1, 2024 workshop and subsequent advice letter filings toward the development of first-of-their-
kind methodologies to permit dual participation across dynamic rate pilots and ELRP Group A.5.
The task at hand – avoiding double compensation and double counting – is no easy feat.
Nonetheless, Advice Letter 5285-E-A contains two key material omissions, detailed below.
First, Advice Letter 5285-E-A does not sufficiently consider alternative methodologies to permit
dual participation as intended and directed in D.24-01-032. Specifically, SCE fails to consider
alternatives to avoiding double compensation. VGIC details below several key alternatives that
were not considered in Advice Letter 5285-E-A and offers itself as a resource to continue
collaborating with SCE, Energy Division staff, PG&E, and other stakeholders to further develop
and weigh these alternatives:
• Adjusted kWh Reading During ELRP Subgroup A.5 Event Hours. When
calculating the dynamic rate pilot shadow bill for a customer participating in ELRP
Subgroup A.5, SCE could revise the customer’s kWh reading during ELRP hours to
equal the dynamic rate pilot subscription kWh load.5 The dynamic rate pilot shadow
bill would therefore not reflect any credits for reductions below the baseline made
during the ELRP event window. From the customer’s perspective, they would receive
ELRP compensation through their aggregator and would not receive any dynamic rate
credits for load reductions made below the dynamic rate pilot baseline during those
same ELRP periods. Notably, PG&E proposed this same methodology during the
5 This may need to be done manually. VGIC posits that the relatively limited scale of ELRP A.5 enrollment
may contribute to the feasibility of manual adjustments.

May 23, 2023
Page 4 of 6
March 1, 2024 workshop as option #2 of five total options for allocating load impacts.6
Under this method, customers are “dual participating” because they are enrolled in both
pilots, yet they are not double compensated for kWh load reduction.
• Compensate Customers Based on Differentiated Grid Benefit Attributes. When
calculating the dynamic rate pilot shadow bill for a customer participating in ELRP
Subgroup A.5, SCE can calculate the bill – and any earned bill credits – based on the
marginal cost-based prices and scarcity price curves envisioned by the CalFUSE
framework, as they would with any other customer dynamic rate pilot customer. Under
this method, SCE compensates dynamic rate pilot customers for the 24x7 load
optimization services attribute they are providing. Meanwhile, ELRP payments are
provided separately to aggregators per the Terms and Conditions of ELRP, for the
emergency load reduction attribute. This is an out-of-market, non-cost-based
approach to bolster grid reliability under the extreme circumstances around which
ELRP is structured. VGIC acknowledges that Subgroup A.5 benefits from a more
expansive 30-hour dispatch requirement each year compared to other Group A
customers, which likely expands beyond the extreme circumstances that serve as the
basis for ELRP. However, this 30-hour requirement was established and then
repeatedly reaffirmed and explicitly upheld through several Commission Decisions and
Resolutions. This reflects the Commission’s clear recognition that the VGI market is
nascent and meaningfully supported by the 30-hour requirement.7 As detailed in
Section II.B. above, this incremental market development support is critically needed
to ensure VGI solutions are available to customers as EV deployment accelerates and
the commensurate grid cost- and reliability-related benefits grow. Under this method,
dual participation customers would be compensated twice for the same load reduction,
however, the payments would be made for different desired attributes.
• Aggregators and/or Customers Share Proprietary ELRP Compensation with
SCE. As proposed in October 9, 2023 reply comments from
CEDMC/OhmConnect/Olivine and Leapfrog, and summarized in D.24-01-032,
another method would be for aggregators and/or customers to share information with
utilities to support dual participation.8 Under this method, the customer could receive
6 PG&E. Dual Participation in Exapnded Pilots. March 1, 2024. Slide 8.
7 See, for example, D.23-12-005 at pg 142: “with ELRP sub-groups A.2, A.4, and A.5, the Commission
sought to encourage the growth of new aggregators and resources that do not participate in other forms of
DR” and Resolution E-5267 at pg 15: “in establishing the minimum dispatch requirement for ELRP sub-
groups A.4 and A.5 in D.21-12-015, the Commission expressed its intent to provide “more certainty to
aggregators regarding potential compensation” in return for their efforts to identify and enroll program
participants… we reject (without prejudice) the IOUs’ proposal…to decrease the minimum dispatch hours
for ELRP sub-groups A.4 and A.5.”
8 CEDMC/OhmConnect/Olivine and Leapfrog Reply Comments on the Staff Proposal filed October 9, 2024.

May 23, 2023
Page 5 of 6
a bill with all the comparative information, as proposed in Advice Letter 5285-E.
Additional firewalls and safeguards would need to be established to protect proprietary
information.
Second, as detailed above in Section II.A., the short- and long-term success of the V2X market is
dependent on the ability to value stack, as appropriate, to overcome the relatively high costs that
accompany a nascent market. Therefore, SCE’s request in Advice Letter 5285-E-A would have a
material impact on dynamic rate pilot V2X customers, who will be unable to participate in the
pilot without the available V2X equipment and service providers. However, SCE fails to provide
an analysis of this impact on V2X customers, a material omission in the Advice Letter.
C. SCE’s Request to Exclude Certain Customers from Participating in the Dynamic
Rate Pilot is Discriminatory and Unjust for these Participants.
Advice Letter 5285-E-A and the subsequently filed Advice Letter 5285-E-B would eliminate dual
participation for dynamic rate pilots in ELRP Sub-groups A.2, A.4, and A.5 but would retain dual
participation for other ELRP Subgroup A customers and other DR program customers, as required
by D.24-01-032. SCE’s request, therefore, applies discriminatory treatment for these customers
who are excluded from dual participation because SCE’s proposed methodologies do not
accommodate these customers.
III. WHAT IS “AT STAKE” FOR THE FUTURE OF V2X.
VGIC commends the Commission and SCE for seeking to establish much-needed pathways for
V2X customers to dual participate in dynamic rate pilots and ELRP Subgroup A.5, the only EV-
focused utility demand response opportunity. VGIC’s critical and overarching concern is that the
market for V2X products and services is still emerging, and there are very few stable revenue
streams available that can help this suite of technologies develop even further. As noted above, the
dynamic rate pilot and ELRP A.5 are currently the only forms of utility compensation for V2X
solutions in California. Thus, VGIC stresses the importance of establishing this dual participation
option so that new market entrants can test the viability of different operating paradigms and use
cases and scale their operations. A market participant might be hesitant to participate in the
dynamic rate pilot if that meant foreclosing the opportunity to continue participating in ELRP
Group A.5. This would also negatively impact the dynamic rate pilots, as the Commission would
forego any lessons learned that would have arose from V2X participation in the dynamic rate
pilots, which is particularly important given the long-term intent to offer mass-market optional
dynamic rates.

May 23, 2023
Page 6 of 6
IV. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit this Protest to the supplemental Advice Letter.
We look forward to collaborating with stakeholders on this important initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
Vehicle Grid Integration Council
cc: Connor Flanigan, SCE (AdviceTariffManager@sce.com)
Adam Smight c/o Karyn Gansecki, SCE (Karyn.Gansecki@sce.com)
Service list of R.22-07-005