BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 21-06-017
Modernize the Electric Grid for a High (Filed June 24, 2021)
Distributed Energy Resources Future.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE HIGH
DER STAFF PROPOSAL
Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
10265 Rockingham Dr.
Suite#100-4061
Sacramento, California 95827
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
Date: May 28, 2024

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 21-06-017
Modernize the Electric Grid for a High (Filed June 24, 2021)
Distributed Energy Resources Future.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE HIGH
DER STAFF PROPOSAL
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) hereby submits
these comments on the Administrative Law Judges’ Ruling Seeking Comment on the Staff Proposal
(“Ruling”) and Administrative Law Judges’ Ruling Memorializing Extension of Time to File
Comments and Providing Corrected Staff Proposal issued by Administrative Law Judges (“ALJ”)
Kelly A. Hymes and Manisha Lakhanpal on March 13, 2024 and April 5, 2024, respectively.
I. INTRODUCTION.
VGIC appreciates Energy Division Staff’s work to create a comprehensive Staff Proposal
on changes to the investor-owned utilities (“IOUs”) distribution planning processes (“DPP”) and
project execution process. The Staff Proposal addresses many improvements that need to be made
to allow for the integration of large amounts of distributed energy resources (“DERs”) that will
add load and generation capacity to California. This state is facing large amounts of DER
integration and interconnection in a very short period of time, seriously challenging the existing
distribution planning process that has had to accommodate relatively small and longer lead time
load growth. Overall, VGIC supports many of the recommendations made by the Staff Proposal,
including improving the IOUs mid- and long-term load forecasting and distribution planning,
2

taking a more proactive approach to executing large distribution upgrades, and ensuring that
distribution planning and project execution teams are adequately resourced and funded.
At the same time, nearer-term approaches and improvements can be made to help integrate
and energize more DERs while longer-term forecasts are improved. To this end, VGIC offers the
following comments on the Staff Proposal:
• The Staff Proposal provides further evidence that the Commission should standardize
flexible service connections and adopt Limited Load Profiles (“LLPs”).
• Coordination between this proceeding and the Energization Rulemaking (R.24-01-018)
will continue to be needed.
• A working group should be established to improve Integration Capacity Analysis
(“ICA”) maps.
II. THE STAFF PROPOSAL PROVIDES FURTHER EVIDENCE THAT THE
COMMISSION SHOULD STANDARDIZE FLEXIBLE SERVICE
CONNECTIONS AND ADOPT LIMITED LOAD PROFILES.
VGIC strongly supports Staff’s Key Goal 1 related to delays and long energization
timelines, “IOUs to develop strategies, such as temporary DER placement or limits on energy use
as bridging solutions for energization requests that require distribution capacity projects.”1 Staff
describes how, "When a customer energization request requires a distribution capacity upgrade,
utilities may be able to energize the customer temporarily, until the upgrade is completed, using
temporary load flexibility via voluntary load curtailment for specific limited times or DER assets
such as mobile batteries. [emphasis added]”2 In order to fully develop the ability for customers to
curtail load during specific times of the day or year, VGIC continues to recommend that the
1 Staff Proposal at 54.
2 Ibid.
3

Commission take up the creation of standardized flexible connection agreements (“FCAs”) and
Limited Load Profiles (“LLPs”).
Recently, Enphase submitted a motion in this proceeding to expand the scope to answer
the question “Should the investor-owned utilities be ordered to amend their energization rules to
allow customers to elect optional flexible connection agreements that use UL 3141-certified power
control systems to implement a Limited Load Profile that avoids distribution upgrades, thus
enabling rapid and cost-effective project deployment and operations?”3 VGIC, as well as Cal
Advocates, Advanced Energy United, California Solar and Storage Association, Clean Coalition,
PowerFlex, The Mobility House, and Pacific Gas and Electric (“PG&E”) all expressed support for
the motion and encouraged near-term record building on these issues. The Staff Report only
provides another piece of evidence that Enphase’s motion should be adopted, as the development
of FCAs and LLPs directly implements the key goal outlined in the Staff Proposal.
III. COORDINATION BETWEEN THIS PROCEEDING AND THE ENERGIZATION
RULEMAKING (R.24-01-018) WILL CONTINUE TO BE NEEDED.
In comments in the Energization OIR and in responses to the Enphase Motion, parties have
discussed whether flexible service connection should be taken up in in this High DER or
Energization Rulemakings. The issues that need to be resolved to standardize flexible service
connections and implement LLPs are cross cutting and involve issues of technology eligibility and
technical requirements (i.e., UL 3141), tariff and rule development, utility operations, customer
engagement, and data tools and tracking. Some of these issues, such as customer engagement and
data tracking are being discussed in the Energization Rulemaking, while technical requirements
3 Motion of Enphase Energy, Inc. to Amend Scoping Ruling and Schedule to Address Optional Flexible Connection
Agreements and the Underwriters’ Laboratory 3141 Standard for Power Control Systems in Investor-Owned
Utilities’ Energization Rules at 7.
4

and standards seem to better fit the High DER proceeding. VGIC is agnostic to which proceeding
takes up these issues but generally recommends that the Commission find a venue for further
discussion quickly. Issues also may inevitably be split across proceedings, which is why VGIC has
recommended, and continues to emphasize the need for, cross-proceeding coordination.4
IV. A WORKING GROUP SHOULD BE ESTABLISHED TO IMPROVE
INTEGRATION CAPACITY ANALYSIS MAPS.
VGIC appreciates Staff’s consideration of improvements to the ICA maps and
recommendations to improve the use of these tools. VGIC strongly supports Staff’s
recommendation that the ICA maps add hourly and monthly capacity information to help
customers implement a Limited Generation Profile (“LGP”), and we are encouraged that PG&E
and SCE are looking to incorporate this functionality in their ICA maps.5 With the creation of
LLPs, as discussed above, VGIC recommends that similar granular data be made available on the
Load ICA to help with the development of LLPs.
However, the Commission needs to provide additional oversight for ICA development and
management generally. Fundamentally, the ICAs still suffer from a lack of accuracy and customer
confidence, and without improvements to these basic elements, these tools are not usable for
significant project planning. Numerous issues have been identified with the ICA map, but these
have been largely handled by the Commission in one-off orders to the IOUs for these to be fixed.
The IOUs do prepare annual reports on refinements to the ICAs but there are no regular venues to
hear updates between these annual cycles or engage with the utilities on the ICAs.
4 See Comments of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council on Phase 1 Scoping Memo Issues submitted in R.24-01-018
on May 3, 2024 at 5.
5 Staff Proposal at 116.
5

VGIC therefore supports the creation of an ongoing working group to discuss needed
improvements to the ICA and keep the IOUs accountable in remedying issues. This can provide a
venue for developers and other stakeholders to bring real-time inaccuracies and other issues with
the maps and dialogue with the IOUs on whether these can be fixed and on what timelines. The
ongoing working group should focus on improving ICA maps with the goal of providing more
certainty to project developers and customers looking to energize load-only sites and interconnect
generation at sites with both new load and generation. The working group could also focus on
simplifying the energization and/or interconnection process, rather than creating additional
formalities or "boxes to check" for project developers. The information these maps provide needs
to be made more up-to-date, accurate, and easy to understand, and they need to convey meaningful
information for them to be useful. Smaller issues are likely to be resolved with informal
coordination between the IOUs and oversight from Energy Division Staff and larger issues can be
refined before being brought to more formal regulatory proceedings. Working groups and
discussion forums convened by Energy Division have been helpful in other instances. For example,
the Rule 21 Interconnection Discussion Forum has provided a way for stakeholders to raise issues
with generation interconnection procedures and work through potential solutions. VGIC
recommends that a similar approach of having regularly scheduled working group meetings be
used for ICA improvements.
V. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide this response to the motion. We look forward
to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
6

/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: May 28, 2024
7