BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 21-06-017
Modernize the Electric Grid for a High (Filed June 24, 2021)
Distributed Energy Resources Future.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE’S RULING SEEKING COMMENTS REGARDING
FUTURE GRID STUDY REPORT
Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
10265 Rockingham Dr.
Suite#100-4061
Sacramento, California 95827
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
Date: December 6, 2024

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 21-06-017
Modernize the Electric Grid for a High (Filed June 24, 2021)
Distributed Energy Resources Future.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE’S RULING SEEKING COMMENTS REGARDING
FUTURE GRID STUDY REPORT
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) hereby submits
these comments on the Administrative Law Judge’s Ruling Seeking Comments Regarding Future
Grid Study Report (“Ruling”), filed October 17, 2024.
I. INTRODUCTION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to comment on the Future Grid Study Report (“FGS
Report” or “Report”). Central to this discussion is the need to modernize California’s grid to
accommodate increasing distributed energy resources (“DERs”) and electrification demands,
including for electric vehicles (“EVs”). EVs being added to the California grid is expanding rapidly
driven to a large degree by rules and programs from the California Air Resources Board (“CARB”)
with the goal to have all new light-duty vehicles sold being zero emissions by 2035. The growth
of EV charging load is creating significant challenges for the existing distribution system.
Furthermore, California is also experiencing an energy affordability crisis, and while much of the
increase in electric utility rates to date has been driven by wildfire mitigation costs, distribution
system upgrades are poised to add significant new costs: as high as $50 billion by 2035 as projected
2

in the Electrification Impacts Study Part 1, filed in this proceeding on May 9, 2023.1 In the
transition to a high DER future, California should leverage the installed base of customer-sited
DERs, including EVs to maximize the use of existing and future distribution infrastructure, while
minimizing upgrades to the extent possible. This will be key to ensuring affordability while also
meeting the state’s carbon reduction goals.
The Future Grid Study Report provides an overview of earlier working group discussions
on the future state of the distribution system with rapidly expanding DER deployments. VGIC
believes that the Report provides insightful discussions into many different items, but the Report
appropriately acknowledges that there are many overlapping items in scope for both this report,
the Smart Inverter Operationalization Working Group (“SIOWG”) Report from Track 3 of this
instant proceeding, and work being done in other venues, such as the Demand Flexibility
Proceeding (R.22-07-005). With the broad nature of the topics and overlapping scopes in
proceedings, VGIC urges the Commission, above all else, to provide clear venues and explicit
next steps for addressing these recommendations, especially for recommendations related to
optimizing DER aggregations and enabling flexible load energization.2 In response to the
report, VGIC provides the following recommendations:
● A dedicated venue to finalize an effective, scalable flexible load energization framework
should be initiated immediately.
1 Administrative Law Judges’ Ruling Setting a Workshop, Admitting Into the Record Part 1 of the Electrification
Impacts Study and Research Plan, and Seeking Comments. May 9, 2023. Attachment 2.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M508/K423/508423139.PDF
2 Parties have used various of terms to describe flexible load energization across the instant proceeding and related
proceedings. Other common terms or phrases that refer to flexible load energization include: Operational Flexibility
in DER Interconnection Agreements, Limited Load Profiles, flexible service connection, and Type II automated load
management. Stakeholders have also used flexible load energization to specifically refer to temporary
implementation before full-scale energization can be achieved, in which case the terms interim service connection,
bridge service connection, scaled service connection, or phased energization are used. In this set of comments,
VGIC uses the phrase flexible load energization to remain consistent with the terminology used in the Future Grid
Study Report.
3

● The Commission should focus on “open access to the distribution system” – as defined in
the Report – operational needs as a top priority for CA. VGIC recommends a specific near-
term focus on the following sub-issues:
○ Improve opportunities for DERs to avoid/defer infrastructure upgrades, including
through promoting managed and bidirectional charging programs in addition to
dynamic rates adopting least-cost infrastructure planning practices.
○ Improve and simplify interconnection agreements and processes.
II. RESPONSES TO RULING QUESTIONS.
1. The FGS Report includes a wide range of stakeholder input and recommendations from three
public workshops. Please review the report (Attachment 1) to ensure it accurately reflects
stakeholder input from the workshops. If there are discrepancies, please identify the sections,
provide specific details and suggested corrections, and identify any inaccuracies, inconsistencies,
or omissions from the workshop discussion in the sections of the FGS Report. Comments should
be limited to workshop discussions and proposed recommendations.
VGIC has no comments on this question at this time but reserves the right to comment at
a future date.
2. The FGS Report outlines ten key operational needs, categorized as broad themes, that are
essential for realizing a High DER future. These needs were identified based on insights and
discussion from Workshop 1 - Identifying Operational Needs. (Refer to Attachment 1, pages 24-
29, "Outcome: Operational Needs for a High DER Future" section.) Based on the stakeholder
survey during workshop facilitation, the FGS Report findings show that the following three
operational needs are considered high priority with sufficient urgency to justify implementation
within 1-2 years:
i. DER Visibility to the Distribution System Operator,
ii. DER dispatchability/control, and
iii. Open access to the distribution system
a) Do you agree that the above operational needs are the highest priority and need to be
implemented within 1-2 years? If so, why?
Sub-issues within “Open Access to the Distribution System” should be prioritized to meet
transportation electrification needs while minimizing infrastructure upgrades. Widespread
flexible load energization and managed and bidirectional charging programs should be
4

important priorities for the Commission for implementation in the next 1-2 years.
VGIC agrees that “Open Access to the Distribution System” should place among the
highest priority operational needs, but we encourage the Commission to focus on particular
distribution optimization items, especially around transportation electrification, to unlock
ratepayer benefits in the near term. In the Report, the term “Open Access to the Distribution
System” encompasses a wide range of DER integration issues and DER distribution services,
including: simplifying interconnection, providing pathways for DERs to reduce distribution
investments, integrating DERs into distribution planning, and creating transactive distribution-
level markets. This is a very broad definition and VGIC would recommend further breaking down
this issue area for implementation and further prioritization of sub-issues.
One of the sub-issues outlined by the Report is to “Meet expected demand for
transportation electrification while minimizing infrastructure upgrades.”3 VGIC believes that
ensuring that EVs are integrated into the grid in the way that most cost-effectively utilizes our
distribution network is one of the most important goals for the California EV transition and this
Commission specifically, as it will critically alleviate the state’s compounding affordability crisis.
In order to achieve this goal, VGIC recommends focusing on the following “Open Access to the
Distribution System” sub-items included in the report as the highest priority for implementation in
the next 1-2 years:4
● Improve opportunities for DERs to avoid/defer infrastructure upgrades
● Improve and simplify interconnection agreements and process
Creating opportunities for DERs to avoid and defer distribution infrastructure upgrades is
key to minimizing the projected costs of widespread electrification. VGIC believes that this should
3 FGS Report at p.26.
4 FGS Report at p.26.
5

be unlocked by allowing the connected load of fleet charging infrastructure to exceed the size of
the service connection in the next 1-2 years with widespread Flexible Load Energization
(especially for long-dwell, multi-charger sites like workplace charging and fleet depots) and
managed and bidirectional charging programs (e.g., targeting residential charging customers).
Regarding Flexible Load Energization, the SIOWG Report in Track 3 of this proceeding,5 as well
as motions by Enphase Energy in this instant proceeding6 and R.24-01-018,7 have outlined a
reasonable framework for discussion. If the Commission were to formally incorporate Flexible
Load Energization into an existing proceeding or open a new proceeding with the express intention
of finalizing an effective, scalable framework, then Flexible Load Energization options for EV
customers could reasonably be implemented at scale in the next 1-2 years.
The Commission can also establish clear direction in the next 1-2 years to reduce the need
for infrastructure upgrades by leveraging managed and bidirectional charging programs that are
purpose-built to support distribution system optimization. There are multiple dynamic rate pilots
that are currently being conducted by the IOUs to explore how to best send price signals to
customers that align with real-time grid conditions and marginal costs, including distribution
system costs. However, VGIC is concerned the underlying complexity characterizing these rates,
designed based on the “CalFUSE” framework, will significantly limit adoption from customers
and the automated service providers (“ASP”) needed to unlock customer participation.
Additionally, certain detailed elements of the CalFUSE approach, including the subscription
5 Smart Inverter Operationalization (SIO) Working Group Report Business Cases and Use Cases, February 1, 2024.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M532/K694/532694061.PDF
6 Motion Of Enphase Energy, Inc. to Amend Scoping Ruling and Schedule to Address Optional Flexible Connection
Agreements and the Underwriters’ Laboratory 3141 Standard for Power Control Systems in Investor-Owned
Utilities’ Energization Rules, R.21-06-017, May 6, 2024.
7 Motion Of Enphase Energy, Inc. to Amend Scoping Ruling and Schedule to Address Optional Flexible Connection
Agreements and the Underwriters’ Laboratory 3141 Standard for Power Control Systems in Investor-Owned
Utilities’ Energization Rules, R.24-01-018, September 11, 2024.
6

element which mutes the savings opportunity for customers, may be unattractive to customers that
actively seek more exposure to real-time system cost conditions. In the next 1-2 years, these pilots
will collect data on customer preference, feasibility of implementation, cost of administration, and,
if measurable, impacts on the distribution system costs. To provide a point comparison to the
results of these innovative, first-in-the nation dynamic rate pilots – and seeing as it is as yet to be
determined the most effective set of strategies to attract the diverse spectrum of EV customers to
grid-supportive strategies – the Commission should ensure that non-rate managed and bidirectional
charging programs are also widely available. These programs can support meaningful customer
engagement in critical, grid-supportive load management and export behaviors. VGIC recognizes
that the ongoing affordability crisis makes it challenging to authorize new ratepayer investments,
even in programs purpose-built to defer and avoid costly upgrades otherwise borne by ratepayers.
However, notably, these same programmatic approaches are identified in the latest amendments
to CARB’s Low-Carbon Fuel Standard as example uses of the IOUs’ LCFS Holback Revenues.8
This presents a no-regrets opportunity to establish large-scale programs – without additional
ratepayer funding – that will help engage customers in managed and bidirectional charging
activities not to reduce bulk system-level net peak load, but rather to mitigate secondary
peaks9 on the distribution system. This is one of the only tools still available to California in
its efforts to protect against the projected $50 billion infrastructure investment expected over
the next decade thereby directly addressing the ratepayer burden.
Importantly, pursuing distribution system optimization through programmatic approaches
does not preclude dynamic rate pilot customers from having access to dynamic price signals. The
8 Proposed Amendments to the Low Carbon Fuel Standard Regulation: Attachment A-1: Final Regulation Order.
November 6, 2024. Page 50-51. https://ww2.arb.ca.gov/sites/default/files/barcu/regact/2024/lcfs2024/lcfs_fro_atta-
1.pdf
9 Alternatively referred to as timer peak or snapback peak.
7

Report notes that in order to implement broader dynamic distribution pricing, the IOUs/DSOs will
have to be able to monitor grid conditions to send accurate price signals to DERs where and when
relief is needed. Additionally, the IOUs, CCAs, and other entities will have to utilize MIDAS and
other systems to send price signals and create billing systems to handle additional customers on
these rates, the latter of which has proven to be a colossal task to date. For these reasons, in addition
to the practical limitations on customer and ASP participation identified above, the Commission
must act now to ensure programmatic managed and bidirectional charging alternatives to dynamic
rate pilots are available at a relatively large scale over the next 1-2 years, including through use of
non-ratepayer funds such as LCFS Holdback Revenues. Additionally, distribution system planning
must account for the impact of these rates and programs to identify the least cost investments to
meet EV charging needs.
The Commission should also prioritize streamlining Rule 21 generator interconnection for
vehicle-to-everything (“V2X”) bidirectional charging resources. V2X bidirectional charging
systems have significant potential to provide both local and systemwide grid benefits, but, to
unlock this, key interconnection barriers need to be removed. There is a Rule 21 interconnection
process for bidirectional chargers, but several key barriers remain. For example, high
interconnection application fees (i.e., $80010 - the highest in the nation) are imposed on these
customers. Additionally, not all IOUs have appropriate interconnection application forms for V2X
bidirectional charging systems, resulting in applications being delayed or risking being knocked
from the generator interconnection process into the load energization process. These items do
10 See respective Rule 21 pages:
https://www.pge.com/en/about/doing-business-with-pge/interconnections.html?ctx=business
https://www.sce.com/business/generating-your-own-power/Grid-Interconnections/Interconnecting-Generation-
under-Rule-21
https://www.sdge.com/more-information/customer-generation/electric-rule-21
8

require discussion, likely in a forthcoming Rule 21 proceeding, but it is reasonable – and necessary
to maximize cost-effective VGI – to achieve significant progress in resolving these issues in a 1-2
year timeframe.
In contrast, many of the other “Open Access to the Distribution System” sub-issues around
transactive markets are likely unable to be implemented in the near-term. VGIC is supportive of
further discussions and developing non-discriminatory procedures for procuring, dispatching &
compensating DERs for distribution grid services. However, there are significant barriers to
overcome to create a centralized distribution-level market to receive bids for different services and
run a clearinghouse like the CAISO currently does for the wholesale energy market. The Report
discusses the need to create a distribution data sharing hub to allow for sufficient data sharing to
facilitate trading and scheduling of DERs.11 VGIC supports this initiative, and notes there are other
proceedings addressing some of these sub-issues, such as the Data Working Group in R.23-12-
011. Given the complexity of a border transactive distribution services market, VGIC recommends
continuing discussions on the topic but focusing Commission resources on the near-term, low-cost
to ratepayers, and no-regrets actions described above to enable widespread EV charging while
mitigating distribution system investments. This will allow stakeholders to focus on the highest
priority, most urgent items that can realistically be implemented in a 1-2 year timeframe.
With this in mind, VGIC recommends that the Commission focus on implementation of
the specific sub-items needed to unlock flexible load energization, non-rate managed and
bidirectional charging programs, and streamlined interconnection. Full DER visibility, for
example, is not likely needed to enable these near-term items and is also unlikely to be
11 FGS Report at p.27.
9

implemented in the near-term. VGIC discusses further issues of visibility and control of DERs in
response to question 3.
b) If you disagree with any of the above-identified high-priority needs, which three
operational needs should be prioritized and why? Please include a timeline for
implementation and explain your reasoning for supporting the priorities.
VGIC has no additional comments on high-priority needs at this time, but reserves the
right to comment at a future date.
3. Diverging approaches to enabling a High DER Future— Following Workshop 1, the workshop
series highlighted a diverging approach to long-term visions for a High DER Future between the
IOUs’ top-down “grid orchestration” approach where DSOs are central in coordinating DERs
and the bottom-up, open-access vision recommended by other stakeholders. (Refer to Attachment
1, page 36, "Key Takeaways from Workshop 2".)
a) Which approach do you support, the top-down “grid orchestration” approach or the
bottom-up, open-access vision for a High DER future? Please explain your reasoning for
supporting the chosen approach and what steps should be taken in this proceeding to
implement this vision. How do these steps align with the DSO’s roles and responsibilities?
VGIC does not agree that these approaches are mutually exclusive and, as such, supports
elements of both visions. For lack of a better term, VGIC believes a “hybrid approach” will best
support affordability and serve the state’s decarbonization goals. Open access to the distribution
grid and customer-centric market design must be fundamental principles of the High DER future,
however, there will remain an essential role for the DSO to play in monitoring, interpreting, and
communicating real-time grid conditions, including to qualified ASPs and other third parties that
will enable the effective integration of DERs onto the grid.
Ensuring that DERs can connect to the grid and begin providing services will help
California maximize the value of these customer resources, especially EVs. California is in a
unique position as the leading EV market in the United States, having recently achieved the
milestone of selling 2 million EVs, but being a leader means that the best path forward to unlocking
10

value from these vehicles is less clear. Aiming for an open access vision will allow California to
move quickly to unlock value and maintain flexibility when it comes to creating value from these
resources. For example, if it is easy for customers to connect EV load (or, in the case of V2X
bidirectional charging systems, interconnect as energy storage) to the distribution grid and enroll
in a variety of efforts, they can choose whether to shape load under a dynamic rate tariff, participate
in more traditional demand response or managed and bidirectional charging programs via a utility,
CCA, or third-party, or, in the case of V2X bidirectional charging systems, discharge to meet site
load. Given the immense scale of EV load flexibility and export capability anticipated over the
next decade, the huge diversity of defined VGI use cases (e.g., the over 1,000 distinct VGI use
cases detailed extensively in the 2019-2020 Joint Agency VGI Working Group12), the growing
affordability crisis and its high stakes, and the underwhelming portfolio of VGI opportunities to
date in California, it would be imprudent for the Commission, VGIC, or any other party to
foreclose on any of these options at this time.
If the DSO plays a very active “orchestration role,” where all DERs are enrolled with the
DSO/IOU and even controlled by the DSO, exploration options will be limited. Having all devices
enrolled with a DSO would likely limit offering and not as many customers would find program
options that work for them. On the other hand, the DSO does hold unique visibility into the
distribution system as a whole and specific expected and real-time grid conditions. As a result,
VGIC envisions an important role for the DSO providing data for DERs to respond to. These
signals can be price/market-based, where the DSO is communicating a real-time price to buy or
sell energy, event-based, where the DSO is signaling a demand response event that customers
12 California Public Utilities Commission. Final Report of the California Joint Agencies Vehicle-Grid Integration
Working Group. June 30, 2020. https://gridworks.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/VGI-Working-Group-Final-
Report-6.30.20.pdf. Page 15.
11

may be obligated or encouraged to respond to, or communicate changes to physical import or
export limits and settings. Some elements of Flexible Load Energization and Limited Load
Profiles, as well as dynamic Limited Generation Profiles, might include more active “grid
orchestration,” where the DSO can send signals to power control systems that respond to limit
imports or exports in real-time. This example shows that some level of grid orchestration and more
explicit direction from the DSO will likely be a part of the High DER future.
b) How do the operational needs identified in question 2 above align with your
recommendation for question 3 (a) above?
VGIC’s recommended priority operational needs discussed in question 2, particularly the
recommendations to create a flexible load energization pathway and establish programmatic
managed and bidirectional charging approaches, are focused on unlocking the most practical and
near-term value from DER orchestration while maintaining customer optionality. Currently, VGIC
can envision a future composed of more complex elements such as transactions between customers
for additional import / export capacity. However, those complex market structures will take
significant amounts of time to develop. In the near-term, the DSO can continue to play an important
role in supporting DER optimization to unlock significant ratepayer benefits, both through
dynamic rate implementation and programmatic approaches, especially those supported by non-
ratepayer funds.
c) Based on the discussions and perspectives presented during the workshop series, do
stakeholders envision a hybrid approach that could bridge the gap between the IOU vision
of grid orchestration and the bottom-up, open-access vision? If so, what might such a
hybrid model entail?
As discussed above, VGIC does envision a hybrid approach for the High DER Future. The
Commission should seek to keep the DER service market open to allow additional DERs to provide
12

grid services. However, a strong DSO role is appropriate, and customers should receive
compensation commensurate with the full stack of services they are providing.
4. In Workshop 2, Assessing Gaps, the stakeholders focused on identifying gaps and barriers to
achieving the operational needs from Workshop 1. During Workshop 2, the IOUs also presented
roadmaps for DERs and/or Grid Orchestration and Automated Distribution Management Systems
(ADMS) and DER Management Systems (DERMS) capabilities in relation to the operational needs
identified from Workshop-1. (See pages 58-82 of Attachment 1, "APPENDIX A: OPERATIONAL
NEEDS GAP ASSESSMENT" for a detailed assessment of the gaps.) The following questions focus
on operational needs and use cases articulated specifically for DER/Grid Orchestration by
leveraging ADMS/DERMS capabilities.
a) Which operational needs and use cases can be operationalized by addressing gaps and
barriers to DER/Grid Orchestration and ADMS/DERMS capabilities? How do these steps
align with the DSO’s roles and responsibilities?
Improvements to ADMS/DERMS are needed to unlock widespread flexible load
energization for flexible import capacity that changes dynamically over time. These changes to
import limits would have to be communicated by the DSO to a customer site with a flexible
energization agreement. PG&E states that they have “plans to scale DERMs capabilities [..] to
communicate load limits day ahead [... and are] looking to scale across territory.”13 Ultimately, it
is the DSO that will have visibility into whether there is additional capacity on a given circuit and
can provide signals that allow customers to take advantage of times when additional capacity is
available on the circuit.
b) What specific steps should be addressed in this proceeding to advance DER
operationalization? How do these steps align with the DSO’s roles and responsibilities?
The first and immediate steps that should be taken by the Commission is to enable
broad-scale flexible load energization and managed and bidirectional charging programs to
unlock latent EV grid-support capabilities. VGIC agrees with the recommendation by Cal
13 FGS Report at p.60.
13

Advocates that “The CPUC should lead a process to develop and implement flexible import limits,
following-on the work of the SIOWG.”14 The DSOs, currently the IOUs, are responsible for
energizing new load on the distribution system. The Commission has the authority to direct the
development of these programs, but it will require active steps to be taken by the IOUs in order to
ensure that rules work with their current DSO processes. This work will likely span proceedings,
which VGIC discusses further below in response to question 5e.
c) The IOUs recommended a working group/task force(s) to collaborate on a framework
that enables advanced DER/Grid Orchestration. Do you agree with this recommendation,
and if so, what are the key factors to consider in forming and setting goals for work
products for this group? If you disagree, what alternative approaches should be
considered?
VGIC does not offer feedback on a working group on DER/Grid Orchestration at this time
but may offer replies to party comments.
d) In Workshops 1 and 2, the IOUs outlined a “grid orchestration” vision for a high-DER
future. The terminology and Grid Modernization Plans (See Attachment 1, Appendix B)
indicate a significant role for DSOs in orchestrating DERs. However, despite pilot work
underway (See Attachment 1, Appendix C), there are still gaps in the timelines for
developing and implementing operational capabilities. What improvements should be
made to the ongoing pilot program? How can the ongoing and proposed pilots guide
further actions to address the gaps? In your response, identify the gaps and the proposed
enhancements.
Currently, both PG&E and SCE are conducting flexible load energization pilots,
specifically for customers who cannot fully energize their sites on a 24/7 basis at this time because
of triggered distribution upgrades. VGIC does not have recommendations to change the pilots at
this time, but we believe that these pilots will provide important insights for the broader discussion
on a flexible load energization framework and rule modifications. We agree with Gridworks that
14 FGS Report at p.51.
14

the results of these pilots should be shared, ideally in a venue focused on finalizing a framework
that would facilitate the evolution from individual pilots to full-scale offerings. VGIC respectfully
urges the Commission to clearly identify this venue.
e) Is there a benefit in reviewing the five nearest-term pilot programs or functions the
utilities can roll out and determining the technical requirements for those options? Explain
your reasoning.
In the Report, the California Solar & Storage Association made this recommendation for
the Commission “to look at the five nearest term programs or functions that the utilities would like
to roll out and determine the technical requirement for those options.”15 VGIC supports the
intention and practicality of this recommendation, but would recommend focusing on the five
programs/functions the Commission is prioritizing, not solely what the utilities would like to
implement. The Commission is in the best position to consider input from all stakeholders to
determine which items should be prioritized for implementation.
5. The FGS Report compiled stakeholder recommendations as five topic summaries based on input
and discussion during Workshop 3 - Developing Recommendations to Address Gaps. The FGS
Report also includes Gridworks’ recommendations for the next steps. (Refer to the “Stakeholder
Recommendations ...” and “Gridworks Recommended Next Steps ...” sections in Workshop 3,
pages 39 – 51 of Attachment 1.)
e) If any of your recommendations require coordination with other proceedings beyond the
scope of the High DER Proceeding, please provide specific details about the necessary
coordination, including the relevant proceedings and issues involved.
For flexible load energization, coordination is needed with the Energization Timelines
Rulemaking (R.24-01-018) in order to update IOU energization rules to include flexible
energization. As discussed by the SIOWG Report, the full implementation of Flexible Load
15 FGS Report at p.51.
15

Energization will require updates to Rule 2, Rule 15, Rule 16, as well as Rules 29 and 45 for EVs.16
The Commission has already stated that “Issues related to energization rules should be addressed
in the energization proceeding.”17 At the same time, the Commission has issues discussed in the
SIOWG that are in scope for this instant proceeding, including: technical operational details of
power control systems, structure and temporal granularity of limited load profiles or schedules,
and methods of allocating available Firm and Non-Firm distribution system hosting capacity. The
Commission has not ruled on Enphase's motion on Flexible Load Energization in R.24-01-018, so
the exact split of issues between the two proceedings remains unclear. Regardless, cross-
proceeding coordination will be critical.
To further non-rate managed and bidirectional charging programs for distribution system
optimization, coordination is needed with the Transportation Electrification Proceeding, R.23-12-
008. While this instant proceeding may discuss how to unlock distribution services and DER
optimization, EV program funding issues, including authorization of LCFS Holdback-funded
programs, is in scope in R.23-12-008.
Streamlining interconnection for V2X resources as discussed in response to question 2a
will require coordination with a Rule 21-focused proceeding. The current Rule 21 Rulemaking,
R.17-07-007, is planned to close, but the Commission has indicated the intention to “open a new
proceeding that focuses on issues affecting interconnection of distributed energy resources under
Electric Rule 21.”18 Once that proceeding is opened, the Commission should include several issues
in the proceeding scope that can meaningfully support V2X bidirectional charging systems,
16 Smart Inverter Operationalization (SIO) Working Group Report Business Cases and Use Cases, February 1,
2024, at p. 115. https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M532/K694/532694061.PDF
17 Administrative Law Judges’ Ruling Denying Enphase Motion, June 21, 2024, at p. 1.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M534/K105/534105698.PDF
18 Proposed Decision Closing Proceeding, R.17-07-007, November 15, 2024.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M546/K381/546381906.PDF
16

including reducing the $800 interconnection application fee and directing basic but critical
functionality be incorporated into each IOUs’ interconnection application forms to apply
appropriate treatment to V2X bidirectional charging systems.
III. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments on the Report. We look
forward to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: December 6, 2024
17