BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to
Establish Energization Timelines. Rulemaking 24-01-018
(Filed January 25, 2024)
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON ORDER
INSTITUTING RULEMAKING TO ESTABLISH ENERGIZATION TIMELINES
Zach Woogen
Senior Policy Manager
Albert Tapia
Policy Analyst
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
10265 Rockingham Dr.
Suite#100-4061
Sacramento, California 95827
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
February 20, 2024

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to
Establish Energization Timelines. Rulemaking 24-01-018
(Filed January 25, 2024)
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON ORDER
INSTITUTING RULEMAKING TO ESTABLISH ENERGIZATION TIMELINES
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) hereby submits
these comments on the Order Instituting Rulemaking to Establish Energization Timelines (“OIR”),
issued by Administrative Law Judge (“ALJ”) on January 30, 2024.
I. INTRODUCTION
VGIC commends the Commission for issuing the OIR to establish reasonable average and
maximum target energization timelines and address additional Commission responsibilities under
Senate Bill (“SB”) 410 and Assembly Bill (“AB”) 50. Electric vehicle (“EV”) adoption in
California is increasing quickly and bringing with it an urgent need to energize new EV charging
sites. Given that these energization projects differ in nature from traditional new service requests,
primarily due to the relatively short timeline in which they can be constructed, and the influx of
other types of customer end uses seeking to electrify, California is confronted with a unique
challenge: lengthy energization timelines that frustrate customers and obstruct California’s ability
to reach its Advanced Clean Cars, Advanced Clean Fleets, Advanced Clean Trucks, and broader
multi-sector decarbonization goals. VGIC generally supports the Commission’s focus on
establishing average and maximum energization timelines and establishing a procedure for
1

customers to report energization delays, as this approach can provide the foundation for achieving
faster energization timelines. However, as detailed in Section III below, establishing target
timelines, customer reporting processes, utility reporting requirements, and utility staffing plans
alone will not be sufficient to achieve timely energization for the coming wave of transportation
and building electrification.
To mitigate against worsening energization bottlenecks, it is essential for the Commission
to explicitly develop a comprehensive suite of solutions to achieve timely energization instead
of limiting itself to the narrow scope of items considered in SB 410 and AB 50. While VGIC
believes that establishing reasonable average energization timelines is important, it would be a
disservice to energizing customers and all ratepayers to overlook inherently flexible vehicle-grid
integration (“VGI”) solutions and other well-established load flexibility approaches as tools to
help advance timely energization. Additionally, given the state’s decarbonization goals and the
growing popularity of customer-sited generation, including vehicle-to-everything (“V2X”)
solutions, it is reasonable to expect a meaningful portion of new energization projects will include
customer-sited generation / distributed energy resources (“DERs”) that can export power back to
the grid and will also need to move through the Rule 21 interconnection process in a timely manner.
VGIC details in Section III below recommended enhancements to the preliminary scope to
promote (a) the development of a comprehensive suite of solutions to facilitate timely
interconnection and (b) adequate coordination between load energization and generation
interconnection processes.
II. BACKGROUND & INTEREST IN PROCEEDING.
VGIC is a 501(c)6 member-based advocacy group committed to advancing the role of EVs and
VGI through policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to
2

a decarbonized transportation and electric sector by ensuring the value from flexible EV charging and
discharging is recognized and compensated to achieve a more reliable, affordable, and efficient electric
grid. VGIC’s members include automotive original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”), EV service
providers (“EVSPs”), distributed energy resource (“DER”) aggregators, and publicly-owned electric
utilities. VGIC holds a direct interest in shaping the policies, procedures, and rules needed to develop
the infrastructure required to support the timely energization of transportation electrification (“TE”).
VGIC has been an active party in related rulemakings (“R.”) such as R.18-12-006, R.21-06-017, R.17-
07-007, R.23-12-008, and R.22-07-005.
III. COMMENTS ON THE PROPOSED SCOPE.
VGIC appreciates the magnitude of challenges facing both the IOUs and customers
regarding the increasingly lengthy gaps between when a customer requests the energization of a
new electrical connection, including connections used to charge EVs, and the IOU’s ability to
energize that site. As discussed at the Commission’s recent AB 50 and SB 410 Energization
Process and Timeline Workshop,1 the challenges related to timely energization range from
situations that are in the IOUs’ control, such as determining if a grid upgrade is needed through
the distribution planning process, to situations that are out of the IOUs’ control, such as upgrade
equipment supply chain constraints (e.g., materials needed to upgrade distribution system). The
OIR’s preliminary scope seems to account for many of the challenges discussed during the
Workshop, but VGIC identifies below several key issues that do not appear to be preliminarily
scoped into the OIR.
1 CPUC. Administrative Law Judge’s Ruling Admitting the February 2, 2024, Workshop Slides into the
Record. February 14, 2024. See: https://www.cpuc.ca.gov/-/media/cpuc-website/divisions/energy-
division/documents/infrastructure/energization/ab50_sb410-energization-workshop_02022024.pdf
3

A. The Commission should consider scoping in a Phase 2 to focus on flexible service
connection and other innovative solutions to achieve the energization timeline
goals established by September 30, 2024, or, at a minimum, ensure these solutions
are addressed in the new TE OIR (R.23-12-008).
Setting energization timelines and related processes required by SB 410 and AB 50 is
necessary to accelerate the energization of new electrical connections but is insufficient. VGIC
strongly believes utilities and customers should be permitted and incentivized to use every tool
available to accelerate energization, including VGI and other load flexibility strategies that can
help avoid or defer infrastructure upgrades. One such tool is currently being facilitated through
Southern California Edison’s (“SCE”) Automated Load Control Management Systems (“LCMS”)
pilot, which allows the use of “customer-side, third party owned, automated load management
systems” to energize EV charging equipment that exceeds the utility’s electrical capacity at that
site, thereby deferring or avoiding the need for time-consuming – and costly – utility-side
infrastructure upgrades.2 While there are limited examples of this being permitted in California, it
is unclear under precisely what framework, incentives, technical requirements, and customer
education processes this operates. The lack of transparency surrounding the design and extent to
which these tools are being implemented muddies the emerging picture of energization timeline
challenges and creates a need for stakeholders to focus on these flexible solutions within the
context of this OIR. As such, VGIC recommends the Commission consider scoping Phase 2 to
establish policies, rules, regulations, and guidelines for implementing flexible service connection
and other tools to mitigate delays to energization. Alternatively, if the Commission does not
establish a Phase 2 in this OIR to address these solutions, VGIC urges the Commission to at least
explicitly scope this matter into the new TE OIR (R.23-12-008).
2 SCE Advice Letter 5138-E and 5138-E-A: Establishment of Southern California Edison Company’s
Customer-Side, Third Party Owned, Automated Load Control Management Systems Pilot. Approved
January 16, 2024; Effective January 3, 2024.
4

VGIC notes solutions and frameworks worth considering include SCE’s LCMS pilot as
well as: load management software that can ensure site load does not exceed a given threshold;
storage-backed charging that can provide a “buffer” between load and the grid; maps and other
planning tools to inform customers and site developers when these solutions could or should be
used; forms and processes to guide customers and site developers using these solutions through
the utility energization process; shared savings models or technology deployment incentive
programs to encourage customer and site host election of these solutions; and utility reporting
requirements to indicate the amount and characteristics of sites that use these solutions.
Much progress has been made in California and around the country on these topics. In
addition to the SCE LCMS pilot detailed above, Pacific Gas and Electric (“PG&E”) has detailed
the cost savings from using these solutions within their EV Charge Network (“EVCN”) program3;
UL has recently published the UL 3141 certification standard to ensure safe and reliable use of
these systems4; New York’s proposed Load Management Technology Incentive Program
(“LMTIP”) to directly incentivize the deployment of these solutions above what is available
through make-ready programs to ensure customers in New York can achieve timely energization
and help meet the state’s transportation decarbonization goals5; and Draft Resolution E-5296
would establish a Limited Generation Profiles framework to facilitate faster interconnection for
3 See, A.21-10-010. PG&E Prepared Testimony at Ch 5-2: “ALM us used to share available electrical
capacity among charging stations to avoid the installation cost of additional electrical capacity. PG&E will
build off the successful use of ALM in EVCN, whereby costs were reduced and physical design constraints
were overcome at customer sites that were deemed a good fit to use this technology.” See also, PG&E
ALM/EV EMS Workshop Presentation. January 29, 2021. “Savings [from ALM] ranged from $30,000 to
$200,000 per project.”
4 UL Standards & Engagement. UL 3141: UL LLC Outline of Investigation for Power Control Systems.
Published January 11, 2024. https://www.shopulstandards.com/ProductDetail.aspx?UniqueKey=45654
5 Joint Utilities’ Electric Vehicle Load Management Technology Incentive Program (“LMTIP”). Case 22-
E-036. https://documents.dps.ny.gov/public/Common/ViewDoc.aspx?DocRefId=%7BC01E3588-0000-
CC11-824F-591C19658923%7D
5

customer-owned generation utilizing Integration Capacity Map values, which is a related concept
and framework that could be adapted to support timely energization.6
Yet another innovative solution that merits consideration in Phase 2 is core energization
process improvements in which third-party certified electricians can authorize and/or conduct
necessary upgrades, thereby mitigating the need for utilities to dispatch an employee to every site
requiring an upgrade. With residential, commercial, and industrial customers seeking upgrades for
EV charging, solar, energy storage, heat pumps, appliances, and other loads, the current process
of dispatching utility employees to every individual site will be entirely insufficient at the scale
anticipated and the pace desired by state policy. VGIC recognizes that utilizing third-party services
and solutions in this way would represent a relatively novel approach within the energization
process, and we strongly believe that safety and reliability should always come first when piloting
or developing mass-market approaches like this. Phase 2 of this OIR or, at a minimum, scoping
items in the new TE OIR R.23-12-008, is likely the right place to consider these innovative
solutions given their importance and complexity.
B. The Commission should ensure close coordination with the Rule 21
interconnection process is included in the scope of this proceeding.
Given customer interest in DERs and the inherent capabilities of EVs as grid-supportive
DERs, VGIC anticipates many customers seeking new or expanded electrical service under Rules
15/16 and 29/45 might also seek a generation interconnection agreement under Rule 21. With this
in mind, VGIC believes changes to the energization process, customer reporting process, and
utility reporting requirements should be closely coordinated with the corresponding policies
6 CPUC Draft Resolution E-5296. Approving in part and modifying Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s,
Southern Edison Company’s, and San Diego Gas & Electric Company’s Advice Letters, submitted per
Resolutions E-5211 and E-5230, providing the specifics and process of Limited Generation Profiles.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Published/G000/M523/K916/523916569.PDF
6

applicable to Rule 21. For example, the Commission should consider whether customers seeking
both load energization and generation interconnection should be given the choice to undergo each
process sequentially or in parallel. Similarly, the two processes should coordinate forms, study
timelines, utility points of contact for customers, technical assistance, infrastructure upgrades, and
related steps. VGIC believes customers should be permitted to seek processes either sequentially
or in parallel and that the necessary information and steps for both pathways are clearly
communicated and streamlined. As such, VGIC strongly recommends the Commission include in
the scope of this OIR an issue, track, or Phase dedicated to streamlining the experience for
customers that are seeking both load energization and Rule 21 generation interconnection. VGIC
offers this not as a replacement for the open Rule 21 proceeding (R.17-07-007) but as an area
where increased coordination is needed.
IV. PROCEDURAL SCHEDULE, CATEGORIZATION, AND NEED FOR
HEARINGS.
VGIC supports the categorization and proposed schedule of this proceeding and agrees
with the preliminary determination that no hearings will be needed.
V. NOTICES.
Service of all notices and communications in this proceeding should be directed to the
following VGIC representative:
Zach Woogen
Senior Policy Manager
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
10265 Rockingham Dr.
Suite #100-4061
Sacramento, California 95827
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
7

VI. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments on the OIR. We look forward
to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Senior Policy Manager
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: February 20, 2024
8