March 22, 2024
Email to: docket@energy.ca.gov
Docket Number: 22-RENEW-01
Subject: California Energy Commission Demand Side Grid Support Program Guidelines
Re: Comments of the Vehicle Grid Integration Council on Demand Side Grid
Support Program Proposed Draft Guideline.
Dear Sir or Madam:
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC) appreciates the opportunity to provide these
comments in response to the Demand Side Grid Support (DSGS) Program Proposed Draft
Guidelines, Third Edition, and the March 12, 2024, Workshop hosted by the California Energy
Commission reviewing the proposed modifications to the DSGS Program Draft Guidelines. The
DSGS program can unlock significant load reductions and exports to support system reliability,
including during extreme weather events, from California’s 1.5 million – and counting – electric
vehicles (EVs). EVs represent a low-cost resource to meet the state’s Strategic Reliability Reserves
that can be deployed at scale and rapidly relative to other resources. However, to achieve this vision,
the DSGS program should be enhanced as detailed below.
VGIC Strongly Supports the Revised DSGS Program Guidelines, Including the Incorporation
of Vehicle-to-Everything (“V2X”) Resources into Option 3 and the Extension of the Incentive
Bonus through 2025.
On slide 17 of the workshop presentation, the CEC proposes to include V2X bidirectional
charging technologies in DSGS Option 3. VGIC strongly supports this modification, as bidirectional
chargers are mobile energy storage systems that are operationally similar to the stationary energy
storage systems already eligible to participate in Option 3.1 Additionally, the CEC proposes to
extend the 30% incentive bonus to program year 2025 for DSGS Option 3, which VGIC supports,
as this will help spur interest in the program and reward early adopters of a valuable but
underutilized solution set. VGIC commends the CEC for its continued leadership in the V2X space
and believes that including V2X in DSGS Option 3 will unlock significant emergency net load
reductions and exports to support system reliability.
Additionally, the CEC correctly proposes to ensure UL 1741 SB certification is not required
for EV supply equipment (EVSE) participating in DSGS Option 3 but must still follow all applicable
1 In 2020, the CPUC confirmed that, for the purposes of interconnection, V2X-DC chargers are energy
storage. See CPUC Decision 20-09-035.
1

permission to operate requirements set by the relevant authority. VGIC strongly supports this
modification, given the lack of available UL 1741 SB-certified V2X equipment.
CEC Should Clarify Dual Participation Rules Between DSGS Option 3 and Certain CEC and
Utility Programs.
The CEC proposes expanding dual participation to “critical peak pricing rate plans.” VGIC supports
this expansion and recommends the CEC clarify whether dynamic rate (i.e., “CalFUSE” rate pilots)
participants are eligible to dual participate in DSGS. VGIC recognizes it is critical to avoid double
counting these resources to ensure DSGS success can be properly measured and evaluated and to
avoid inefficient use of program budgets. Notably, the CPUC hosted a workshop on March 1st to
address the issue of double counting/compensation and to discuss methodologies to implement
certain types of dual participation. The below graphic demonstrates the methodology developed by
PG&E to avoid double counting/compensation between dynamic pricing pilots (i.e., CalFUSE rates)
and various other demand-side management measures:
Given that ELRP and DSGS are both emergency demand response programs, VGIC posits that the
above graphic would look nearly identical if “ELRP” were replaced with “DSGS.” As such, VGIC
recommends the CEC explicitly clarify whether dual participation is permitted between DSGS and
dynamic rates, not just CPP, to allow for “value stacking” and ensure DSGS funds can be
supplemented to unlock the greatest possible amount of incremental emergency capacity.
Additionally, the CEC’s Distributed Electricity Backup Assets (DEBA) solicitation concept weighs
dual participation across DEBA and DSGS for certain customer participation Pathways. VGIC
recommends that the CEC’s updated DSGS guidance also reflect this dual participation use case to
avoid customer confusion.
CEC Should Consider in Future Revisions How to Account for V1G Load Reduction Within
DSGS.
2

The CEC should consider how to account for unidirectional or “V1G” load reduction in
future DSGS revisions. As California experiences consistent growth in EV deployment, using every
tool in the toolkit will be critical to enable EV load flexibility. VGIC respectfully requests the CEC
staff to continue collaborating with stakeholders to develop DSGS enhancements that promote
greater EV participation, including in unidirectional or “V1G” mode.
Conclusion.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments and looks forward to
collaborating with the CEC and other stakeholders in this docket.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
Vehicle Grid Integration Council
Albert Tapia
Policy Analyst
Vehicle Grid Integration Council
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
3