DOCKETED
Docket Number: 22-EVI-06
Project Title: Vehicle-Grid Integration
TN #: 260228
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC) Comments on Charge
Document Title:
Yard Pre-Solicitation Workshop
Description: N/A
Filer: System
Organization: Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
Submitter Role: Public
Submission Date: 11/22/2024 12:23:37 PM
Docketed Date: 11/22/2024

Comment Received From: Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
Submitted On: 11/22/2024
Docket Number: 22-EVI-06
Comments of VGIC on Charge Yard Pre-Solicitation Workshop
Additional submitted attachment is included below.

November 22, 2024
Email to: docket@energy.ca.gov
Docket Number: 22-EVI-06
Subject: California Energy Commission Charging Interoperability and Collaboration Yard
RE: Comments of the Vehicle Grid Integration Council on the Charging Interoperability
and Collaboration Yard Pre-Solicitation Workshop
Dear Sir or Madam:
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC) appreciates the opportunity to provide comments
on the California Energy Commission's (CEC) Charging Interoperability and Collaboration Yard
Pre-Solicitation Workshop. VGIC supports the forthcoming Grant Funding Opportunity (GFO) to
establish a Charge Yard, a dedicated facility to conduct interoperability testing, support the
development of industry standards, and foster knowledge sharing to enhance electric vehicle (EV)
charging and vehicle-grid integration (VGI).
VGIC is supportive of the Charge Yard solicitation overall and is excited to see the development
of a dedicated space to improve the EV charging experience and unlock additional VGI capabilities
for California and beyond. VGIC believes that the general structure of the Draft Solicitation put
forward by the CEC is reasonable, but we offer the following feedback:
● VGIC supports requiring at least one bidirectional testing event per year, including for
light-, medium-, and heavy-duty vehicles.
● Testing for flexible service connection use cases should be prioritized, particularly for
medium- and heavy-duty applications.
● Redundant non-testing event requirements should be eliminated.
VGIC SUPPORTS REQUIRING AT LEAST ONE BIDIRECTIONAL TESTING EVENT
PER YEAR.
VGIC strongly supports the requirement for at least one annual testing event for bidirectional
charging technologies. The CEC has long supported efforts to unlock the benefits of utilizing
bidirectional charging systems. Bidirectional charging systems can provide backup power during
outages, help customers manage their electric bills, and provide capacity to the grid during times
of grid stress. However, vehicle-to-everything (“V2X”) bidirectional charging systems still
occupies a relatively nascent state compared to unidirectional EV charging industry. Additional
testing of technical standards and further exploration of V2X bidirectional charging configurations
1

can help California unlock the full value of V2X. The Charge Yard provides a critical venue for
advancing these efforts.
To ensure the one-event-per-year provision can be enabled in practice, the forthcoming Solicitation
should require applicants to detail their approach to utility interconnection. All previous
interoperability testing events in North America have been restricted to unidirectional charging in
part because the event hosts did not hold completed generator interconnection agreements with
their electric utility. Applicants should specify whether they plan to go through the Rule 21
interconnection process for the semi-permanent bidirectional EV supply equipment (EVSE) that
will be located at the site, pursue a special arrangement with their utility that allows them to
interconnect semi-permanent bidirectional EVSE, invest in an islanded microgrid configuration
that foregoes the need for Rule 21 interconnection, or seek some other pathway. To the extent
possible, the CEC should outline possible interconnection pathways applicants can consider in the
Solicitation Manual. Applicants should be encouraged to coordinate with the relevant electric
utility and should receive preferential scoring if the utility provides a support letter or other
document clearly indicating its commitment and provisional plan to support interconnection that
would enable the bidirectional charging to occur. Generally, VGIC recommends the Solicitation
encourage competency and intentional planning as it relates to utility interconnection to ensure
that bidirectional charging testing can be implemented in practice.
Lastly, the CEC should require the Charge Yard to test V2X bidirectional charging systems for
both light-duty and medium- and heavy-duty vehicles (MHDVs). All vehicle classes can provide
V2X benefits and may be best suited for different use cases. For example, school bus fleets are
currently the most common users of bidirectional EVSE. The CEC should, therefore, require that
MHDVs are included in V2X bidirectional charging testing events.
TESTING FOR FLEXIBLE SERVICE CONNECTION USE CASES SHOULD BE
PRIORITIZED, PARTICULARLY FOR MEDIUM- AND HEAVY-DUTY
APPLICATIONS.
VGIC also supports the testing of flexible service connection solutions (alternatively referred to
by California state agencies as “automated load management (ALM)” technologies) at the Charge
Yard. These solutions offer critical tools for shaping EV charging load to significantly reduce the
lengthy energization timelines currently faced by many fleet customers. Technologies that enable
flexible service connections include ALM/EV EMS software, certified power control systems, and
DER-paired EVSE. Testing can include power sharing, changing import limits according to a pre-
set schedule, responding dynamically to signals from Advanced Distribution Management
Systems (ADMS) or Distributed Energy Resource Management Systems (DERMS), or other
2

potential pathways. Both PG&E and SCE are conducting flexible service connection pilots for
MHDV customers.
Charge Yard can provide an important venue for testing these new technologies, standards, and
interoperability for this use case, and this capability should be included by the CEC in the final
solicitation.
REDUNDANT NON-TESTING EVENT REQUIREMENTS SHOULD BE ELIMINATED.
The Draft Solicitation requires the Charge Yard to host at least two non-testing events annually,
such as workshops or conferences. VGIC recommends removing this requirement and instead
encouraging coordination with existing events hosted by California agencies (CEC, CPUC,
CARB) and industry stakeholders.
VGIC appreciates the vision to utilize the Charge Yard as a space for stakeholder convening and
collaboration beyond specific interoperability testing events. However, there are already many
stakeholder convening events in California and nationally related to EVs, VGI, and V2X, including
the CPUC’s annual Vehicle-Grid Integration Forum, the CEC’s and IOUs’ EPIC Symposiums, the
Smart Grid Observer’s twice-annual V2G Business, Policy & Technology Forum, the EV
Charging Summit and Expo, VGIC’s annual EVolve event, among other industry and regulatory
stakeholder workshops and events that share similar programming and audience. There is no need
to add additional regular conferences or events for stakeholders, especially given the limited pool
of deep technical experts in the industry.
Instead of hosting new events, the Charge Yard should seek to collaborate with existing events,
such as serving as a hosting venue. The Charge Yard should also share public reports and data
from testing activities to enhance industry learning and collaboration. This approach would ensure
that the Charge Yard remains focused on its core mission of advancing interoperability testing
while contributing to – though not duplicating – broader stakeholder discussions and knowledge
sharing.
CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments on the Draft Solicitation
and looks forward to collaborating with the CEC and other stakeholders in this docket.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
3

Interim Executive Director
Vehicle Grid Integration Council
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
4