BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 24-01-018
Establish Energization Timelines. (Filed January 25, 2024)
REPLY COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON
PHASE 1 SCOPING MEMO ISSUES
Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
10265 Rockingham Dr.
Suite#100-4061
Sacramento, California 95827
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
Date: May 17, 2024

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 24-01-018
Establish Energization Timelines. (Filed January 25, 2024)
REPLY COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON
PHASE 1 SCOPING MEMO ISSUES
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”)1 hereby submits
these reply comments on the Assigned Commissioner’s Scoping Memo and Ruling (“Scoping
Memo”) and Email Ruling Adjusting Phase 1 Schedule and Addressing the April 2, 2024 Joint
Investor Owned Utilities’ Motion issued by Administrative Law Judge (“ALJ”) Carolyn Sisto on
March 28, 2024 and April 8, 2024, respectively.
I. INTRODUCTION.
In Opening Comments on Phase 1, many parties outlined their work towards meeting
transportation electrification mandates and goals largely set by the California Air Resources Board
(“CARB”) but highlighted that a barrier to achieving these goals is the current energization
timelines for electric vehicle charging infrastructure. Achieving timely energization to enable the
needed vehicle electrification will require many modifications to the way California’s investor-
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., BorgWarner,
Fermata Energy, Ford Motor Company, General Motors, Nissan Group of North America, Bidirectional
Energy, Customized Energy Solutions, dcbel, Eaton Corporation, Emporia Corp., EnergyHub, EV.Energy,
FreeWire Technologies, Inc., GridWiz, Kaluza, Landis + Gyr, Leapfrog Power, Inc., Nuvve Holding
Corporation, Peak Power, PowerFlex, Qcells, Stellantis N.V., Sumitomo Electric, The Mobility House,
Toyota Motor North America, Inc., WeaveGrid, Hoosier Energy, Peninsula Clean Energy, and
Sacramento Municipal Utility District. The views expressed in these Comments are those of VGIC, and do
not necessarily reflect the views of all individual VGIC member companies or supporters.
(https://www.vgicouncil.org/)
2

owned utilities (“IOU”) have historically planned for energization of new load and distribution
upgrades more generally.
The establishment of energization timelines will help to push the IOUs to move more
quickly and will also provide customers with expected timelines they can plan around. However,
as discussed by many parties, many energization projects, especially medium- and heavy-duty
charging stations, require larger, multi-year distribution upgrades that are harder to establish
standard timelines for.2 Even if distribution upgrade timelines are established, reasonable timelines
that are achievable by the IOUs may last multiple years for some sites, and interim or alternative
energization solutions will be needed. For this reason, the Commission must include flexible
service connection solutions in the initial energization timelines and reporting requirements set by
Phase 1 of this proceeding.
II. MULTIPLE PARTIES SUPPORT INCLUDING FLEXIBLE SERVICE
CONNECTION IN ENERGIZATION TIMELINES.
VGIC reiterates the importance of having utilities offer flexible service connection (e.g.,
automated load management (“ALM”) solutions) to customers with exceptionally long
energization timelines, as well as tracking use of these strategies in energization timeline reporting,
which was supported by multiple parties in opening comments. As highlighted by Advanced
Energy United (“United”), “the establishment of timelines should incorporate the necessary
discussion and consideration between the customer and utility, and potentially for bifurcated or
reduced steps in the process,"3 including flexible service connection solutions. Calls for
2 The Joint IOUs have outlined that distribution capacity upgrade timelines “will vary greatly by upgrade, based
upon the variables that are unique to that upgrade.” See San Diego Gas & Electric Company (U 902-E), Pacific Gas
and Electric Company (U 39 E), and Southern California Edison Company (U 338-E) Response to Administrative
Law Judge Ruling Directing Utility Responses to Questions Regarding Energization Timelines at 5.
3 United Opening Comments at 13.
3

consideration and tracking of flexible connection were echoed by the Environmental Defense Fund
(“EDF”) and Natural Resources Defense Council (“NRDC”),4 Powering America’s Commercial
Transportation (“PACT”),5 Terrawatt Infrastructure,6 and Voltera.7
Based on this strong stakeholder support, VGIC believes that, at a minimum, tracking the
deployment of these flexible service connection solutions should be included in Phase 1 timelines.
VGIC’s suggested items to include in timeline reporting were outlined in opening comments and
include: (1) whether flexible connection solutions were proposed or accepted, (2) the type of
flexible connection, and (3) the type of flexible connection technology used.8 In addition to
tracking data regarding flexible service connection, VGIC also supports the proposal from EDF
and NRDC for the IOUs to include “discussion of the process improvement progress completed in
the prior year, discussion of the customer-specific solutions (e.g. deployment of distributed energy
resources and flexible interconnection agreements) the utility has offered to customers and/or
deployed in the prior year, those solutions’ effectiveness at shortening customer-specific timelines,
and any staffing changes made to implement these solutions and shorten the timelines."9 Written
discussion on the IOUs’ experience implementing these solutions will provide valuable insights as
timelines are updated and as the Commission considers broader implications for distribution
planning and ratepayer costs. As highlighted by Advanced Energy United, flexible service
connections can “avoid or defer grid upgrades and to reduce costs and maximize the efficient use
of existing infrastructure.”10 Discussion on the implementation of these solutions can show how
these solutions are providing cost savings to ratepayers and will inform how the IOUs should plan
4 EDF and NDRC Opening Comments at 6.
5 PACT Opening Comments at 5.
6 Terrawatt Infrastructure Opening Comments at 3.
7 Voltera Opening Comments at 6.
8 See additional detail in VGIC Opening Comments at 6-8.
9 EDF and NRDC Opening Comments at 10.
10 United Opening Comments at 11.
4

for large loads as California seeks to electrify. However, VGIC emphasizes that narrative
discussion detailing process improvements is a complement – not a substitute – to regular
energization timelines and flexible service connection data reporting.
III. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these reply comments on Phase 1 of this
proceeding. We look forward to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on
this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: May 17, 2024
5