July 22, 2024
Andrew S. Johnston
Executive Secretary
Maryland Public Service Commission
William Donald Schaefer Tower
6 St. Paul Street, 16th Floor
Baltimore, Maryland 21202
Re: Case No. 9478; Comments of Vehicle-Grid Integration Council on BGE’s Smart
Charge Management Program Proposal
Dear Mr. Johnston,
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”)1 respectfully provides its comments in response
to Baltimore Gas and Electric’s (“BGE” or “the Company”) Smart Charge Management Program
Proposal to the Maryland Public Service Commission (“Commission”) in Case No. 9478.
I. Introduction
VGIC is a 501(c)(6) membership-based advocacy group committed to advancing the role of
electric vehicles (“EVs”) and vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”) through policy development,
education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to decarbonized transportation
and electric sectors by ensuring the value from EV deployments and flexible EV charging and
discharging is recognized and compensated to achieve a more reliable, affordable, and efficient
electric grid.
II. Comments
VGIC appreciates BGE’s work on advancing managed charging. BGE has been a leader in
making the transition to electric vehicles affordable, reliable, and clean. The Company was
among the first utilities in the country to utilize new rates to encourage charging off-peak, and
they continue to leverage technologies to further enhance the integration of electric vehicles onto
the grid—including utilizing alternative technologies to support time-of-use rates, piloting active
managed charging at significant scale with a focus on distribution optimization and pursuing
partnerships to vehicle-to-everything (“V2X”) bidirectional charging solutions. As a national
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., BorgWarner, Fermata Energy,
Ford Motor Company, General Motors, Nissan Group of North America, Bidirectional Energy, Customized Energy
Solutions, dcbel, Eaton Corporation, Emporia Corp., EnergyHub, EV.Energy, Flux, Inc., FreeWire Technologies,
Inc., GridBeyond, GridWiz, Kaluza, Landis + Gyr, Leapfrog Power, Inc., Nuvve Holding Corporation, Orange
Charger, Peak Power, PowerFlex, Qcells, Stellantis N.V., Sumitomo Electric, The Mobility House, Toyota Motor
North America, Inc., WeaveGrid, Clean Power Alliance, Hoosier Energy, Peninsula Clean Energy, and Sacramento
Municipal Utility District. The views expressed in these Comments are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect
the views of all individual VGIC member companies or supporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/)
1

trade group, we often point to successes in Maryland and at BGE on electric vehicle-grid
integration as leading examples for other state commissions and utilities to follow.
BGE proposes expanding the Company’s residential offering and points to the continued
stakeholder support for Smart Charge Management (“SCM”). BGE has requested that the
Commission consider the Company’s request to expand its SCM offering in advance of the
Commission’s consideration of the Company’s Phase II EV proposal to ensure that the SCM
program continues seamlessly without customer interruption. The expansion will provide
customers with more choices in technology and enable BGE to expand SCM to maintain “the
strong program track record, ensure continuity and positive customer experience, and grid
benefits that would support the EV transition.2” Many parties have expressed support for the
SCM work, to date, including Commission Staff, Maryland Office of People Counsel, ev.energy,
and Alliance for Transportation Electrification. VGIC expressed support in our comments on the
Phase 1 programs and is reiterating our support here for both the SCM demonstration work and
BGE’s proposed expansion.
With this expansion proposal, BGE aims to support Maryland’s policy goals. BGE’s efforts to
advance EVs and decarbonize the transportation and electricity sectors are aligned with
Maryland’s Advanced Clean Cars II policy, the Maryland Climate Solutions Now Act of 2022,
and the Distributed Renewable Integration and Vehicle Electrification (DRIVE) Act.
BGE’s proposal also highlights the benefits of SCM for customers and the grid. In BGE’s filing,
the Company points to a cost-effectiveness test result of 1.58 under the Maryland jurisdiction-
specific benefit-cost test. This benefit-cost analysis highlights that BGE’s managed charging
offering is cost-effective. The program increases the affordability of EV charging, recognizing
that the benefits of VGI “include wholesale energy cost savings, capacity cost savings, marginal
T&D cost savings, reduction in transmission and distribution losses, and positive grid
reinforcement (deferral of additional distribution system buildout).”3
VGIC believes that BGE’s request is reasonable. The Company proposes expanding a successful
and cost-effective pilot that has captured a wide range of benefits, making EV charging more
affordable by shifting energy to low-cost times, reducing charging during the system peak, and
lowering the level of non-coincident peaks that impact the distribution system. We also
commend BGE’s proposal to scale up the program in terms of participation and note that there
are other utilities with similar targets. For instance, Con Edison in New York already had 12,260
customers participating in its managed charging program at the end of 20234 and Xcel Energy
Colorado administers a managed charging program approved by the Colorado Public Utilities
Commission to target more than 40,000 customers by the end of 2026.5
2 BGE. June 24, 2024. Smart Charge Management Program Proposal. Case No. 9478
3 BGE. June 24, 2024. Smart Charge Management Program Proposal. Case No. 9478
4Consolidated Edison Company of New York, Inc.. January 30, 2024. Managed Charging Implementation Plan.
Case 18-E-0138. Page 26.
5 Public Service Company of Colorado (Xcel Energy). Attachment HS-1. 2024-2026 Transportation Electrification
Plan. Proceeding Number 23A-0242E. Page
2

As discussed in our comments on the Phase 1 review, we are fortunate that, as an industry, few
pilots or programs have had a temporary discontinuance. Still, we are aware of the negative
impacts of starting and stopping programs that have affected other customer program areas.
VGIC respectfully advises against interrupting the significant progress made in the VGI space.
We urge the Commission to enable BGE to continue to serve existing customers while also
opening new enrollments in this important EV program offering and avoiding any scenario
where cost-effective programs are suspended.
VGIC strongly recommends that the Commission approve BGE’s expansion proposal. Keeping
the program going is important for ensuring customer continuity and expanding access to a cost-
effective VGI program. Expanding the SCM program will lead to greater benefits, supporting
large scale EV adoption and reducing impacts to the grid and ratepayers.
III. Conclusion
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide comments and looks forward to further
collaboration with stakeholders on this important initiative,
Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
(510) 665-7811
3