August 12, 2024
Energy Division
California Public Utilities Commission
505 Van Ness Avenue
San Francisco, California 94102
EDTariffUnit@cpuc.ca.gov
RE: Comments of the Vehicle Grid Integration Council on Draft Resolution E-5313
Dear Sir or Madam:
Pursuant to the provisions of General Order 96-B and Comment Letter E-5313 circulated
on July 22, 2024, the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) hereby submits these
comments to Draft Resolution E-5315, which approves, with modifications the Advice Letter
5185-E of Southern California Edison (“SCE”) Company, Advice Letter 7125-E of Pacific Gas
and Electric Company, (“PG&E”), and Advice Letter 4350-E of San Diego Gas and Electric
Company (“SDG&E”), Lessons Learned from the Vehicle to Grid Alternating Current Pilot and
Recommendations for A Pathway Forward (“Joint Advice Letter”) submitted on January 5, 2024.
Overall, VGIC continues to support implementing the temporary pathway for vehicle-to-
grid (“V2G”) alternating current (“AC”) interconnection. Therefore, VGIC submitted a response
supporting the Joint Advice Letter to extend the V2G AC pilots. The Draft Resolution correctly
determines that the pilot should be extended and that alternative interim interconnection
pathways should be considered to allow for additional pilot participation. However, in response
to the Draft Resolution, VGIC offers several key areas of concern in the comments below that
must be addressed in the final adopted resolution.
I. VGIC SUPPORTS THE APPROVAL OF THE EXTENSION OF THE V2G AC
PILOT.
VGIC supports the Commission’s determination that the IOUs should “reopen the V2G
AC Interconnection Pilot and extend it until tariff modifications for a permanent interconnection
process for V2G AC systems are approved by the Commission.” As highlighted in the Draft
Resolution, extending the pilot pathway will allow for additional learnings on V2G AC
interconnection, which is still a nascent interconnection pathway that various industry
stakeholders are still developing and further understanding. These learnings will be important for
the further development of a more permanent interconnection pathway in Rule 21.
1

While the original Joint Advice Letter requested an extension of the pilots only through
2025, the Commission is correct in determining that there should not be a definitive calendar
date for the sunset of these pilots. VGIC agrees that given the changing and, at times, lengthy
timelines of standards approval, it makes sense to maintain flexibility in the timeline for the
extension of the pilot in order to “avoid gaps in the interconnection process for V2G AC pilot
projects between the end of the V2G AC Interconnection Pilot and the time a permanent
interconnection process for V2G AC systems is added to, and becomes effective in, Rule 21.”1
This will also avoid having the IOUs submit any future non-substantive Advice Letters to merely
request further extensions of the pilots because of delays.
II. THE COMMISSION SHOULD CORRECT ERRORS RELATED TO THE
PROCESS FOR ALLOWING ADDITIONAL INTERIM APPROACHES.
VGIC also supports the Draft Resolution approving the IOUs’ ability to allow additional
interim V2G AC pathways, including those not requiring a relay, to be used in this pilot. The
current interim V2G AC interconnection pathway’s requirement of relays is likely reducing the
number of participants seeking to interconnect under this pathway, given the significant cost of
relay devices. There may be other approaches that could be used to provide alternative interim
interconnection pathways, and VGIC agrees with the Draft Resolution that the IOUs should be
allowed to pursue those pathways, which will undoubtedly offer valuable insights to shape the
long-term initiative to incorporate V2G AC in Rule 21.
However, process outlined in the Draft Resolution to approve alternative pathways
includes an industry-led working group and Advice Letter process. This is misaligned with the
steps needed to support an alternative interim pathway. The Draft Resolution outlines roughly 3
months of “industry-led” working groups followed by the submission of a Tier 2 Advice Letter
roughly a month later. While staff approval of a Tier 2 Advice Letter is faster than the process of
Resolution approval, it will likely take several months for the Advice Letter to be approved. This
means that customers will not be able to utilize the alternative interim pathway for at least 6
months, in the best case scenario.
Moreover, an alternative interim pathway cannot emerge from stakeholder discussion and
Advice Letters alone. Demonstration, piloting, field testing and validation, or other real-world
experience is required to establish an alternative interim pathway. Put differently, the Draft
Resolution’s proposed process is ordered backwards: the industry-led work, informed by the
IOUs, and subsequent Advice Letter process could not progress without first developing real-
world experience. This has been made abundantly clear from the development of UL 1741 SC,
where the core specifications that comprise the standard emerged from real-world experience in
SCE’s EPIC V2G AC Pilot. While the UL 1741 SC committee is diligently working through a
1 Draft Resolution at 8
2

critical consensus-driven stakeholder process, its origins are in real-world experience led by
SCE. VGIC expects this same dynamic – experimenting first – would hold true for an interim
non-relay pathway, as well.
With this in mind, VGIC strongly urges the Commission to allow the IOUs to gain
experience with interim approaches by working directly with pilot participants to allow
interconnection without the use of a relay. While VGIC understands the value of establishing a
consensus-driven interim approach that “must be applicable industry wide,”2 this must be
balanced with the need to efficiently establish such interim approaches and acknowledgement
that they cannot emerge without real-world piloting. VGIC believes that without this flexibility,
IOUs will have no means to experiment with applicable interim pathways that could inform the
consensus-drive, industry-wide approach envisioned by the Draft Resolution. The Commission
should aim to further the effectiveness of this pilot as a space to provide valuable data on real-
life V2G AC interconnection that can be used to determine the best way to advance V2G AC
given the current standards environment.
III. THE RESOLUTION SHOULD NOT FORECLOSE THE POTENTIAL FOR
INTERIM INTERCONNECTION PATHWAYS TO BECOME PERMANENT.
In the Draft Resolution, the Commission cites the Joint Advice Letter, stating that “Once
standard and certification requirements for V2G-AC have been published and Rule 21 is
updated, all new V2G-AC projects must comply with those requirements and the alternative
certification process developed for V2G-AC pilot projects will no longer be available for use.”3
VGIC believes that the intent behind this phrasing is to state that once a methodology for V2G
AC interconnection is adopted under Rule 21, customers seeking interconnection of these
devices must follow Rule 21 protocols, instead of using the non-Rule 21 interim pilot pathway.
However, the Commission should not automatically assume that interim pathways from the pilot
will not be integrated into Rule 21 as permanent pathways for interconnection. There are many
stakeholders anticipating the release of UL 1741 SC, and it is implied in the Joint Advice Letter
and Draft Resolution that this UL standard will form the basis for a permanent Rule 21 pathway.
However, this is not a foregone conclusion. The IOUs and pilot participants may find that
interim pilot solutions could be found as acceptable interconnection standards that could be
integrated into Rule 21. It is also very possible that multiple pathways could be integrated into
Rule 21 to ensure safe and reliable interconnection while also supporting customer choice. This
principle of customer choice is not uncommon within Rule 21, which holds several options and
pathways for any given technology to move through the Rule 21 process.
2 Draft Resolution at 9
3 Draft Res at 9 citing Joint AL at 4
3

Lastly, VGIC would like to note that customers that have interconnected under a pilot
pathway should be allowed to continue to operate under that pathway if they so choose.
Customers should not have to re-apply for interconnection under Rule 21 once their system is
operational.
IV. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit these comments on the Draft Resolution. We
look forward to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION
COUNCIL
cc: Jose Aliaga-Caro, CPUC (Jose.Aliaga-Caro@cpuc.ca.gov)
Caitlin Pollock, CPUC (Caitlin.Pollock@cpuc.ca.gov)
Connor Flanigan, SCE (AdviceTariffManager@sce.com)
Adam Smith, SCE, c/o Karyn Gansecki (Karyn.Gansecki@sce.com)
Sidney Bob Dietz II, PG&E, c/o Megan Lawson (PGETariffs@pge.com)
Greg Anderson, SDG&E (GAnderson@sdge.com, SDGETariffs@sdge.com)
Service list R.17-07-007
Service list R.18-12-006
4