May 14, 2024
Comments of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
on ComEd BE Pilots
I. INTRODUCTION.
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)1 is a 501(c)(6) nonprofit member-based
association focused on accelerating the role of smart electric vehicle (EV) charging and
discharging (i.e., vehicle-grid integration or “VGI”) through policy development, education,
outreach, and research. Scaling VGI is an essential part of transportation electrification and
supports the following key goals:
• Benefit EV drivers and fleet owners by reducing the total cost of ownership and
providing additional value streams like backup power.
• Decarbonize the transportation sector by accelerating EV adoption through
additional benefits to EV drivers and fleet owners.
• Support the evolving electric grid by providing essential grid services as variable
energy generation and distributed energy resource penetration increases.
• Increase affordability by right-sizing infrastructure investments and placing
downward pressure on rates, in turn reducing electricity bills for all customers.
• Improve community resiliency and security by utilizing EVs to provide emergency
power during planned and unplanned grid outages.
• Foster economic activity by catalyzing innovation, competition, and market
transformation.
With the proper utility and regulatory support and coordination, these goals can be
achieved, and individual EV drivers and EV fleets in Illinois can play a critical role in the
acceleration of both transportation electrification and grid decarbonization. Our vision for VGI
encompasses the following key elements:
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., BorgWarner, Fermata Energy,
Ford Motor Company, General Motors, Nissan Group of North America, Bidirectional Energy, Customized Energy
Solutions, dcbel, Eaton Corporation, Emporia Corp., EnergyHub, EV.Energy, FreeWire Technologies, Inc., GridWiz,
Kaluza, Landis + Gyr, Leapfrog Power, Inc., Nuvve Holding Corporation, Peak Power, PowerFlex, Qcells, Stellantis
N.V., Sumitomo Electric, The Mobility House, Toyota Motor North America, Inc., WeaveGrid, Hoosier Energy,
Peninsula Clean Energy, and Sacramento Municipal Utility District. The views expressed in these Comments are
those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all individual VGIC member companies or supporters.
(https://www.vgicouncil.org/)
1

• Ensure customer mobility needs are satisfied: Drivers and fleets can support the grid
without compromising mobility needs.
• Managed charging will benefit EV drivers and fleet operators: Drivers and fleets in
Illinois will be provided a menu of opportunities to align charging with the times of day
when electricity prices are low, reducing EV and fleet operating costs by as much as 50%
compared to unmanaged charging. Lowering the total ownership cost of EV ownership will
accelerate overall EV adoption by drivers and fleet managers in Illinois. Furthermore,
managed charging reduces the need for expensive distribution system upgrades.
• EVs provide reliable emergency power during blackouts: During extreme weather
blackouts or other power outages, EV drivers and fleets can utilize bidirectional charging
capabilities to send energy to a home, building, or microgrid, serving as a generator and
providing safe emissions-free backup power for households and communities.
• VGI strategies right-size charging infrastructure investments and accelerates
deployment: Smarter management of EV charging will help maximize the impact of utility
infrastructure investments, which encourages wider access to EV charging.
• VGI enables EVs to provide valuable services to the grid and generate revenue: V2X
(vehicle-to-everything bidirectional charging) enables EVs to both charge and feed power
back to the grid, providing grid services such as demand response, peak shaving, frequency
regulation, and more. A number of utilities across the US have implemented programs that
provide compensation for these valuable grid services.
VGIC commends ComEd for hosting the BE Plan 2 Stakeholder Collaboration Sessions and
appreciates the opportunity to provide feedback on ComEd’s proposed BE Plan pilots.2 VGIC
offers the recommendations below to support ComEd as it executes the proposed pilots and
continues developing BE Plan 2.
II. DISCUSSION
a. VGIC supports ComEd’s proposed pilots and advises against relitigating the
findings in Final Order 22-0432.
On March 23, 2023, the Illinois Commerce Commission (“Commission”) issued Final
Order 22-0432 in ComEd’s Beneficial Electrification Plan (“BE Plan”), requiring ComEd to
2 ComEd BE Plan 2 Stakeholder Collaboration Session 1. Beneficial Electrification (BE) Plan 2: Stakeholder
Collaboration – Session 1, April 10, 2024; ComEd BE Plan 2 Stakeholder Collaboration Session 2. Beneficial
Electrification (BE) Plan 2: Stakeholder Collaboration – Session 2, April 17, 2024.
2

implement eight pilots (“BE Pilots”) as part of their BE Plan.3 As such, ComEd filed its BE Plan
Compliance Filing in May 2023, which outlined the eight planned BE Pilots developed based on
stakeholder ideas and Commission directives. ComEd’s BE Pilots included the following eight
pilots: (1) School Bus Vehicle-to-Grid, (2) Residential Optimized Charging, (3) Curbside
Charging, (4) Ridesharing (or other pilot program aimed at providing EV access to low-income
and EJ/R3 customers for whom car ownership is not an option); (5) Backup Power Capabilities,
(6) EV EMS, (7) Submetering, and (8) Air Quality Mapping Pilot. 4
VGIC commends ComEd’s efforts in developing the BE Pilots, which represent important
steps forward for Illinois’ ability to leverage VGI technologies. Despite the Commission’s prior
approval and explicit direction for the eight BE Pilots and ComEd’s attempted compliance with
this directive, participants in the recent BE Plan 2 stakeholder workshops questioned the
effectiveness of ComEd’s proposed pilot plans. While VGIC believes it is unfortunate that these
pilots have not yet launched in the 14 months since the Final Order, VGIC recommends ComEd
continue its efforts to establish all eight BE Pilots as directed by the Commission’s Final
Order. The BE Pilots should not be subject to cancellation or significant alteration, as that would
undermine the Commission’s intent and the state’s clean energy goals.
Moreover, as detailed below, these pilots will yield important lessons that will inform the
scale-up to mass-market, territory-wide customer offerings that will play a central role in ComEd’s
grid of the future. ComEd has an important opportunity to lay a foundation for widespread success
in BE Plan 2 and beyond by continuing with the proposed BE Pilots.
b. ComEd should execute and assess the BE Pilots through an intentional lens of
scalability.
VGIC reiterates that ComEd should move forward with proposed pilots and not cancel or
reduce the scale of any proposed pilots; however, we recommend the following improvement to
pilot execution. While findings related to technology demonstration are generally valuable, the
implementation and assessment of the BE Pilots must include a clear roadmap from small-scale
pilots to large-scale programs. Specifically, VGIC recommends ComEd develop a Roadmap to
Scale for each pilot that includes the following key elements:
3 Illinois Commerce Commission Final Order 22-0432, Petition for Approval of Beneficial Electrification Plan under
the Electric Vehicle Act, 20 ILCS627/45 and New EV Charging Delivery Classes under the Public Utilities Act, Article
IX. March 23, 2023. See: https://www.icc.illinois.gov/docket/P2022-0432/documents/349478/files/610872.pdf
4 ComEd Beneficial Electrification Plan Compliance Filing, Pg. 42.
See: https://www.icc.illinois.gov/docket/P2022-0432/documents/338224/files/589765.pdf
3

• Identification of customer engagement, marketing, education, and outreach
strategies tested in the BE Pilots that should be preserved in a scale-up to mass-
market program.
• Needs assessment for large-scale integrations with third-party technology providers
and viable partnership structures.
• Results of customer incentive tests (e.g., monthly vs yearly payments) and
identifying the share of upfront vs performance-based incentives that yield the
desired customer behavior and/or automated technology response.
• Identification of internal utility operational and process improvements needed to
achieve mass-market implementation.
Example learnings that can inform an on-ramp from small-scale pilot to large-scale
program include integrating flexible service connection (i.e., “EV EMS”) into the new load request
process for sites with exceptionally long energization timelines, streamlining the interconnection
process for vehicle-to-grid (“V2G”) charging equipment, improving customer interconnection
portals and forms, rate design experiments for vehicle-to-everything (“V2X”) bidirectional
charging use cases, and customer access to make-ready funding for sites where BE Pilot
technologies are used.
VGIC notes similar pilots across the US have successfully evolved into larger-scale
initiatives. For example, in California, Pacific Gas & Electric’s (“PG&E”) tested and demonstrated
the capabilities of bidirectional charging technology from various manufacturers and third-party
service providers in its V2X Pilots – Phase 1, as is highlighted in PG&E’s most recent VGI annual
report.5 PG&E is now slated to launch a larger-scale “V2X Pilots – Phase 2,” which aims to enroll
more customers and experiment with additional incentive mechanisms. Furthermore, V2G school
bus pilots supported by San Diego Gas & Electric (“SDG&E”) later evolved into commercial
deployments enrolled in California’s large-scale voluntary emergency demand response program,
the Emergency Load Reduction Program.6 Lastly, Consolidated Edison’s residential managed
charging program, Smart Charge NY, began as a small-scale pilot and has now evolved into a
mass-market program available to all residential EV customers.7
5 PG&E, Vehicle Grid Integration Report by Pacific Gas and Electric Company (U 39 E). March 15, 2023. See:
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M503/K589/503589008.PDF
6 Nuvve Corporation. Blue Bird Delivers North America’s First-Ever Commercial Application of Vehicle-to-Grid
Technology in Electric School Bus Partnership with Nuvve and Illinois School Districts. March 23, 2021.
https://nuvve.com/blue-bird-v2g-electric-bus-with-nuvve-and-illinois-school-districts/
7 https://www.coned.com/en/save-money/rebates-incentives-tax-credits/rebates-incentives-tax-credits-for-
residential-customers/electric-vehicle-rewards
4

With this in mind, VGIC recommends that ComEd not only proceed with the proposed
BE Pilots, but also adopt an explicit focus on charting a path toward large-scale programs,
including identifying necessary steps to support (1) customer engagement, (2) third-party
provider integration, (3) incentive and compensation design, and (4) operational
enhancements. While adequate demonstration of VGI technology capabilities is important,
ComEd must also pilot programmatic design elements and implementation strategies that can
effectively and efficiently evolve into mass-market program offerings in the near future.
c. The Backup Power Capabilities Pilot should proceed but be enhanced to support
customers and match the current stage of market development for backup power
solutions.
ComEd proposed the eight pilots discussed above in its compliance filing “to unlock the
full potential of beneficial electrification.”8 VGIC agrees that ComEd will be unlocking significant
potential from beneficial electrification, including transportation electrification, via the BE Pilots.
As workshop participants noted, ComEd’s approach must coincide with current EV technological
advancements, including market developments since the pilots were litigated in 2022 and 2023.
Specifically, workshop participants inquired about the need for a Backup Power Capabilities pilot
given the commercially-availability of vehicle-to-building (“V2B”) backup power solutions.
While VGIC maintains that none of the eight Commission-directed BE Pilots should be canceled
or significantly altered, we do recognize that the market for these V2B backup power solutions has
evolved considerably since 2022, and with it, the pilot may also need to evolve. With this in mind,
rather than limiting the Backup Power Capabilities pilot to “study mobility requirements,
bidirectional EV charging stations, and the performance of EVs as backup power sources,”9 VGIC
recommends ComEd prioritize (1) customer marketing, education, and outreach for V2B
backup power solutions and (2) upfront incentive mechanisms to support equipment
adoption of V2B backup power solutions. This would allow ComEd to execute on the
Commission-approved pilot while ensuring its efforts appropriately match the current stage of
V2B market development.
III. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit these comments on ComEd’s proposed BE
Pilots. We look forward to further collaboration with ComEd and other stakeholders in Illinois on
this important initiative.
8 Ibid.
9 Ibid. Pg. 43.
5

Respectfully submitted,
Zach Woogen
/s/ Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
(510) 665-7811
www.vgicouncil.org
6