BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking
Regarding Transportation Rulemaking 23-12-008
Electrification Policy and (Filed December 14, 2023)
Infrastructure.
(NOT CONSOLIDATED)
Order Instituting Rulemaking to
Continue Development of Rates and
Infrastructure for Vehicle Rulemaking 18-12-006
Electrification.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON ORDER
INSTITUTING RULEMAKING REGARDING TRANSPORTATION
ELECTRIFICATION POLICY AND INFRASTRUCTURE AND CLOSING
RULEMAKING 18-12-006
Zach Woogen
Senior Policy Manager
Albert Tapia
Policy Analyst
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
10265 Rockingham Dr.
Suite#100-4061
Sacramento, California 95827
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
January 19, 2024

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking
Regarding Transportation Rulemaking 23-12-008
Electrification Policy and (Filed December 14, 2023)
Infrastructure.
(NOT CONSOLIDATED)
Order Instituting Rulemaking to
Continue Development of Rates and
Infrastructure for Vehicle Rulemaking 18-12-006
Electrification.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON ORDER
INSTITUTING RULEMAKING REGARDING TRANSPORTATION
ELECTRIFICATION POLICY AND INFRASTRUCTURE AND CLOSING
RULEMAKING 18-12-006
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”)1 hereby submits
these comments on the Order Instituting Rulemaking Regarding Transportation Electrification
Policy and Infrastructure and Closing Rulemaking 18-12-006 (“TE OIR”), issued by
Administrative Law Judge (“ALJ”) on December 14, 2023.
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., BorgWarner, Fermata Energy,
Ford Motor Company, General Motors, Nissan Group of North America, Nuvve Holding Corporation, Toyota
Motor North America, Inc., BlueGrid Energy, Customized Energy Solutions, dcbel, Emporia Corp., EnergyHub,
EV.Energy, FreeWire Technologies, Inc., GridWiz, Kaluza, Kitu Systems, Landis + Gyr, Ninedot Energy, Peak
Power, PowerFlex, Qcells, Rhythmos, Inc., Stellantis N.V., Sumitomo Electric, The Mobility House, Wallbox USA
Inc., WeaveGrid, Hoosier Energy, and Sacramento Municipal Utility District. The views expressed in these
Comments are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all individual VGIC member companies or
supporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/)
1

I. INTRODUCTION.
VGIC commends the Commission for issuing the OIR and appreciates the attention given
to timely energization of electric vehicle (“EV”) charging infrastructure, transportation
electrification (“TE”) grid planning to support charging infrastructure deployment, deployment of
behind-the-meter (“BTM”) charging infrastructure to support state goals, vehicle-grid integration
(“VGI”), and ongoing TE policy development and collaboration. The previous TE Rulemaking
(“R.”) 18-12-006 developed a framework for funding BTM charging infrastructure, clarifying the
IOUs’ role in TE, adopted key VGI strategies pursuant to Senate Bill (“SB”) 676, adopted a
submetering protocol for EV supply equipment (“EVSE”), and established strategic focus areas
for VGI. VGIC and its members appreciate the progress made through each of these efforts in
pursuit of widespread TE. VGIC generally supports the Commission’s focus on the emerging TE
issues identified in the new TE OIR, including timely energization of EV charging sites, grid
planning for freight and other TE use cases, impacts on rate payers, and establishing goals and
targets to advance VGI.2
The scope and timeline of the TE OIR are significant, which is appropriate given the
imperative for TE to meet the state of California’s climate goals. As detailed below, VGIC supports
a dedicated track for VGI issues; however, it is critical that VGI solutions not be treated as an
optional component of the TE planning portfolio or as an afterthought being considered only after
immense TE infrastructure deployment. VGI is a critical tool that can help California achieve its
ambitious transportation and energy sector decarbonization goals. The OIR states that “[t]he
growth of zero-emission vehicles, and the deployment of new charging infrastructure to support
the growing pace of zero-emission vehicle adoption, will have varying impacts on local
2 OIR at 8.
2

distribution systems and will require significant grid upgrades.”3 VGI strategies can aid in
alleviating cost pressures and energization timeline challenges that have been experienced to date
and are expected to continue or worsen as EV adoption accelerates. VGI strategies, therefore,
should be a key component of all TE infrastructure planning. VGIC offers the below comments
recommending modifications to the OIR’s preliminary scope to holistically incorporate VGI
throughout California’s emerging TE strategy and, in turn, optimize the deployment and use of
infrastructure necessary to enable electrification and thereby reduce the ratepayer impacts of TE.
II. BACKGROUND & INTEREST IN PROCEEDING.
VGIC is a 501(c)6 member-based advocacy group committed to advancing the role of EVs
and VGI through policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the
transition to a decarbonized transportation and electric sector by ensuring the value from flexible
EV charging and discharging is recognized and compensated to achieve a more reliable,
affordable, and efficient electric grid. VGIC’s members include automotive original equipment
manufacturers (“OEMs”), EV service providers (“EVSPs”), distributed energy resource (“DER”)
aggregators, and electric utilities, and has a direct interest in shaping the policies, procedures, and
rules needed to develop the infrastructure required to support the acceleration of TE. VGIC has
been an active party in related rulemakings such as R.18-12-006, R.22-07-005, R.17-07-007, and
R.21-06-017.
III. COMMENTS ON THE PROPOSED SCOPE.
In recognition of increasing EV adoption in California and the required charging
infrastructure to support it, VGIC appreciates the magnitude of challenges facing the state’s major
3 OIR at 7.
3

investor-owned utilities and the established Commission TE policies. Leveraging the unique
flexibility of EVs and EVSE offers the grid a relatively low-cost and increasingly critical approach
to maintain electric reliability, unlock rate affordability, and reduce lengthy energization timelines.
It will take an intentional and coordinated effort to capitalize on the opportunity of the coming
mass deployment of EVs and the associated charging infrastructure.
Critically, planning for VGI cannot be considered in isolation from other efforts or as an
afterthought. VGIC believes it would be a missed opportunity to deploy the needed charging
infrastructure and distribution system upgrades without prudent consideration of VGI as a tool to
manage EV load and moderate costs. Similarly, using VGI strategies to accelerate energization
timelines should not be addressed after customers have navigated lengthy – and ever-lengthening
–service connection queues. This demands an explicit and comprehensive framework for
advancing VGI to address these and other challenges associated with TE.
VGIC appreciates the Commission’s “VGI Strategic Focus Areas” adopted in D.22-11-
040, but California needs a more comprehensive VGI Roadmap that includes a critical role for
bidirectional charging, vehicle-based managed charging programs, automated load management
solutions, and other key VGI technologies. SB 676 directs the Commission to maximize VGI. To
fulfill this vision, VGIC recommends several enhancements below to ensure the scope of this
proceeding is inclusive of all necessary VGI issues. VGIC also details a recommendation for the
Commission to scope a precise process to maximize VGI benefits, including by adopting a
participation/procurement target, establishing interim targets, adopting metrics to measure success
against targets, identifying gaps and barriers to achieving VGI targets, and approving strategies to
address each gap and barrier.
4

A. The Commission should establish discrete Tracks to facilitate parallel progress
and “quick wins” across TE issues rather than sequencing topics solely by
urgency.
The OIR identifies five issues and eight sub-issues within the preliminary scope for this
proceeding.4 To guide parties, VGIC recommends the Commission establish discrete tracks that
infuse VGI throughout for the following key TE issues:
• Track A: Solutions to energization timelines and the IOU side-of-meter & BTM
paradigm’s impact on ratepayers.
• Track B: VGI targets, market transition, and holistic road-mapping.
• Track C: Statewide BTM rebate program development (i.e., Funding Cycle 1).
• Track D: TE infrastructure planning tools and investments, including freight, non-
freight MHDV, and LDV charging needs, Funding Cycle 0, and Funding Cycle 2.
By developing distinct Tracks, the Commission can organize key issues in parallel efforts
rather than strictly sequencing related issues, which may delay progress on urgent matters and miss
opportunities for “quick wins” with outsized impact.
B. The VGI Track should consider market transition support and costs to enable
third-party aggregator participation.
VGIC appreciates the inclusion of “technology enablement” as a strategic focus area for
VGI and its explicit inclusion in the OIR’s preliminary scope. While D.22-11-040 does not
explicitly define VGI technology enablement, it states the following in its discussion of the
technology enablement topic within the Annual VGI Forum:
“This focuses on technology enablement, VGI in existing IOU programs and pilots, and
the incorporation of new technology developments into FC1. This forum should coordinate
4 OIR at 12.
5

with the CEC’s VGI staff to showcase recent developments (e.g., emerging technology,
ALM, coordination on VGI equipment certification, etc.).”5
Based on this, VGIC interprets technology enablement to include (1) unlocking emerging VGI
technologies and (2) considering standards and equipment certification. There are two key
elements to market enablement that VGIC recommends be explicitly addressed in the scope of this
proceeding:
• Market transition support to encourage customer adoption of VGI-capable
equipment. This is particularly important for equipment that enables relatively
nascent VGI market segments, like bidirectional chargers. Due to the early stage of
market development for these technologies, it is important to provide market
transition support in cases where ratepayers are expected to benefit from mass
deployment as the industry matures. Notably, proactive technology deployment
incentives have been successfully used in California for rooftop solar, smart
thermostats and load control, and stationary energy storage. Today, these
technologies yield significant affordability and reliability benefits for customers,
ratepayers, and society at large, and VGIC posits this same blueprint could be
successfully applied to VGI technologies.
• Consideration of development and integration costs for third-party
aggregators and service providers. Bringing in new aggregators/service
providers that service new types of customer assets/equipment, such as connected
EVs and EVSE, bidirectional charging equipment, and storage-backed EVSE, may
require the provider to develop new software and technology to support the
integration of the customer-owned equipment into pilots, programs, and/or rates.
Sufficient funding mechanisms and revenue are needed to entice these third-party
providers to undertake this development effort and provide their services to retail
customers and the grid throughout VGI pilots, programs, and/or rates. This is
particularly important for emerging technologies and customer-owned equipment
like bidirectional vehicle-to-everything (“V2X”) EVSE or submetering via
EVSE/vehicle telematics, where the underlying technology, integrations, and data
flows are not nearly as developed as, say, smart thermostats.
5 D.22-11-040 at 174.
6

C. The VGI Track should explicitly scope in the following types of VGI goals:
customer participation targets and utility procurement directives.
VGIC strongly supports the OIR’s intent to “establish goals and targets for the
advancement of vehicle-grid integration.” VGI progress in this proceeding’s predecessor, R.18-
12-006, was largely driven by the SB 676 legislative directive to develop strategies to maximize
VGI. This created an imperative to spur the market, however, the tangible impact of SB 676 and
the resulting D.20-12-029 has been essentially limited to Pacific Gas & Electric’s V2X Pilots,
which recently launched Phase 1 (focused on backup power) and are still pending approval for
Phase 2 (adding grid export). The underlying need for SB 676 and maximizing VGI has not
diminished and, in fact, has strengthened as EV adoption accelerates and the associated time and
cost pressures continue to mount.
With this in mind, VGIC urges the Commission to adopt a set of clear, explicit, and
ambitious goals for VGI to establish a “north star” to guide market development. While
maximizing VGI remains a key theme, well-defined quantitative targets provide a benchmark
against which we can track progress. VGIC offers the following two types of goals that should be
included in the scope of the VGI Track:
• Customer Participation Targets: VGIC recommends the Commission seek party
feedback on and ultimately adopt an appropriate customer participation target, in
terms of number of customers and/or participating MW, for VGI programs and rates
in California. Targets should apply to specific initiatives within the state’s VGI
portfolio, for example, individual VGI pilots, programs, and rates. An overall
target(s) across the entire portfolio should also be adopted. These targets can be
informed by existing data from the Joint IOU Electric Vehicle Load Research and
Charging Infrastructure Cost Report, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory’s
(“LBNL”) California Demand Response Potential Study, which were both used as
key inputs in California’s recent Integrated Resource Planning cycle to indicate
7

VGI customer enrollment, as well as additional studies in California and other
jurisdictions that can support an informed customer participation target.6
• Utility Procurement Directives: VGIC recommends the Commission seek party
feedback on and ultimately direct VGI procurement by utilities. This can be a share
of customers and/or MW capability, which could include cumulative installed
bidirectional charging capacity. This directive could be an overarching requirement
for California’s investor-owned utilities (“IOU”) to procure a certain amount of
demand flexibility and/or grid exports from VGI technologies. This approach was
utilized to procure stationary energy storage, which helped to kickstart the industry.
VGIC believes this successful approach can be applied to VGI customer resources
and should be considered in the VGI Track of this OIR.
D. The VGI Track should seek to develop a clear VGI Roadmap to achieve the
established targets and procurement directives and accomplish quick wins.
VGIC recommends the VGI Track scope include a precise process to maximize VGI by
adopting participation and procurement targets, as noted above. In addition to these “north star”
goals that will set an end destination for VGI efforts, VGIC urges the Commission to consider
establishing interim VGI targets, adopting metrics to measure success against VGI targets,
identifying gaps and barriers to achieving VGI targets, and approving strategies to address each
gap and barrier. This road-mapping approach creates critical linkages between the desired end
state, the milestones that must be hit along the way, and the actionable strategies various state
agencies must pursue to achieve the desired outcomes. This roadmap can identify key near-term
barriers and “quick wins,” and detail a path for overcoming more challenging obstacles to
widespread VGI.
6 Inputs & Assumptions: 2022-2023 Integrated Resource Planning (IRP). October 2023. CPUC. Pg 110.
https://www.cpuc.ca.gov/-/media/cpuc-website/divisions/energy-division/documents/integrated-resource-
plan-and-long-term-procurement-plan-irp-ltpp/2023-irp-cycle-events-and-materials/inputs-assumptions-
2022-2023_final_document_10052023.pdf
8

E. Strategies for achieving faster energization, including Automated Load
Management (“ALM”), should be considered given the nearly universal
applicability of energization timeline challenges and the fundamental need for
operational EVSE.
VGIC recognizes that the Commission is slated to adopt another new OIR at its January
25, 2024 voting meeting to address Timely Energization pursuant to SB 410 and Assembly Bill
(“AB”) 50. The draft Timely Energization OIR will set average and maximum energization
timeline targets. The new TE OIR, in contrast, appears to be the appropriate venue to consider
strategies to achieve faster energization timelines, including both software- and hardware-based
automated load management (“ALM”) strategies. Given that lengthy energization timelines
challenge most TE efforts, VGIC believes it is appropriate to deem solutions to lengthy
energization timelines as a high-priority issue to be addressed in the near-term within this new TE
OIR.
F. The Commission should coordinate closely with (1) demand response portfolio
development, (2) Rule 21 interconnection of bidirectional V2X chargers, and (3)
the High DER OIR and Timely Energization OIR.
The OIR’s preliminary scoping memo section on VGI refers to “programmatic and policy
interventions.”7 VGIC strongly supports the consideration of programmatic approaches to
promoting VGI, such as the Managed Electric Vehicle Charging at Home program proposed by
PG&E in its recently shared EPIC 4 Portfolio.8 VGIC has raised the question of where managed
charging programs or other VGI programs (e.g., bidirectional charging) can be proposed in both
the preceding TE OIR (R.18-12-006) and the recent Demand Response (“DR”) Portfolio
Application (Application 22-05-002 et al.). The topic had been “bounced” between proceedings,
7 OIR at 12.
8 PG&E’s EPIC 4 Portfolio. Presented January 16, 2024. Slides 33-34.
https://www.pge.com/en/about/corporate-responsibility-and-sustainability/taking-
responsibility/emerging-electric-technology-programs.html#accordion-268a6f67d5-item-804c2f0b8b
9

with Decisions in each proceeding referring the topic to the other proceeding. While the matter of
programmatic approaches to VGI is unquestionably included in the preliminary scope of the new
TE OIR, VGIC urges the Commission to coordinate closely with any future DR portfolio
applications to ensure alignment across these initiatives, which could overlap.
In considering remaining barriers to VGI market development and opportunities for “quick
wins,” VGIC notes that the preliminary scope does not reference V2X interconnection. While this
issue is scoped into R.17-07-007 by way of its relevance to each IOU’s Rule 21, VGIC strongly
urges the Commission to coordinate the new TE OIR with R.17-07-007 on the topic of V2X
interconnection. Developing a standardized and streamlined process to interconnect both V2X DC
and V2X AC resources to the grid in a timely fashion remains a critical keystone to advancing the
VGI market.
Lastly, VGIC notes that the High DER OIR (R.21-06-017) and the new Timely
Energization OIR, which may be approved as early as January 25, 2024, address the matter of
energization timelines. Including this new TE OIR, the CPUC would simultaneously host three
separate dockets in which this issue is addressed. VGIC urges the Commission to either consolidate
the treatment of this issue, explicitly clarify scopes, or closely coordinate across all three
proceedings on this matter.
G. Low Carbon Fuel Standard holdback revenue utilization was initially addressed
in R.18-12-006, but outstanding issues should be scoped into the new TE OIR.
The preliminary scope thoughtfully details or implicitly captures most TE and VGI issues.
However, VGIC notes that the Low-Carbon Fuel Standard (“LCFS”) Holdback Revenue priorities
and implementation plans are not mentioned in the OIR. Anticipated amendments to the LCFS
Regulation by the California Air Resources Board (“CARB”) in March of this year indicate that
10

the new TE OIR should include these topics.9 As VGIC understands it, LCFS implementation plan
development and approval have recently been held/discouraged pending CARB’s LCFS updates.
Once CARB finalizes LCFS updates, the CPUC is poised to take the issue back up and issue
guidance/approvals for utility spending. VGIC recommends the Commission scope LCFS
holdback revenues into the new TE OIR to ensure the progress made in R.18-12-006 can continue.
IV. PROCEDURAL SCHEDULE AND TIMING.
VGIC supports the categorization and proposed schedule of this proceeding and agrees
with the preliminary determination finding that no hearings will be needed.
V. NOTICES.
Service of all notices and communications in this proceeding should be directed to the
following VGIC representative:
Zach Woogen
Senior Policy Manager
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
10265 Rockingham Dr.
Suite #100-4061
Sacramento, California 95827
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
VI. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments on the OIR. We look forward
to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
9 CARB, Proposed LCFS Amendments, https://ww2.arb.ca.gov/rulemaking/2024/lcfs2024.
11

/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Senior Policy Manager
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: January 19, 2024
12