September 6, 2024
The Honorable Janet Yellen
Secretary
U.S. Department of the Treasury
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20220
The Honorable Daniel Werfel
Commissioner
Internal Revenue Service
1111 Constitution Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20224
Dear Secretary Yellen and Commissioner Werfel,
On October 5, 2022, the Department of Treasury (Treasury) issued six notices to inform the
implementation of key clean energy provisions of the historic Inflation Reduction Act (IRA),
including § 30C, which extended and modified the Alternative Fuel Vehicle Refueling Property
tax credit. In the factsheet that accompanied those notices, Treasury committed to “work
expeditiously to provide clarity and certainty to taxpayers, so the climate and economic benefits
of this historic legislation can be felt as quickly as possible.” Treasury and the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) partially delivered on this promise for the § 30C tax credit in January 2024 by
providing initial guidance (Notice 2024-20) defining census tracts eligible for § 30C. This was a
critical step to realizing the vision of the IRA and we strongly support Notice 2024-20’s inclusive
4

approach that will ensure more American consumers and business qualify for the tax credits.
However, more guidance is needed to allow taxpayers to take advantage of this important policy.
We urge Treasury and IRS to define single item of property, capitalization of costs, and
low-population census tracts so that the rulemaking process can begin and guidance can be
finalized and implemented by the end of this tax year, allowing people and businesses to
access this vital tax credit.
Urgency of Action
The IRA was signed into law nearly two years ago and since has spurred unprecedented private
investment through strategic tax credits. However, the lack of guidance on critical aspects of §
30C is stalling investment in public and residential EV charging infrastructure in non-urban and
low-income areas, which is a key factor in achieving the Administration’s vehicle emission
standards and electrification and equity goals. Although Treasury and the IRS have announced
their intent for a rulemaking for § 30C, additional needed guidance on the topics detailed below
should be proposed as soon as possible. Without preliminary guidance proposed in the next
month, charging credits from public charging infrastructure deployed in tax year 2023 could
potentially be rendered valueless to those looking to claim them.
In addition to issuing preliminary guidance within a month on the issues discussed below,
Treasury and IRS should also file a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking to provide appropriate time
for a public comment period while ensuring a final rule is released by the end of the tax year.
Having finalized guidance for all aspects of § 30C by December 31, 2024 will allow individuals
and businesses to begin claiming the credit on their 2024 taxes and invest in much needed new
infrastructure with certainty.
Single Item
Treasury and IRS must clarify the definition of a “single item” of qualified alternative fuel
vehicle refueling property. This definition should align with the Federal Highway
Administration’s definition of a charging port for the National Electric Vehicle Infrastructure
Program, which considers a port as a system within a charger that can charge only one EV at a
time, even if it has multiple connectors.1 It should be flexible enough to accommodate both
current practices and future developments in the industry, recognizing that some chargers can
serve multiple EVs simultaneously through shared infrastructure, which offers significant cost
savings. To illustrate, if a charger has two connectors and can charge two EVs simultaneously
(e.g. a 350 kilowatt or “kW” fast charger can charge one vehicle at 350 kW or two vehicles at
175 kW), it should be considered two single items, each of which should be subject separately to
the credit cap. This definition also aligns with common practices in state-administered charging
1 23 CFR Part 680 https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-23/chapter-I/subchapter-G/part-680
5

programs, such as those in California,2 North Carolina,3 and Ohio.4 This approach will help
ensure the § 30C tax credits effectively promote the installation of flexible, cost-efficient EV
charging infrastructure.
Capitalization
Treasury should issue additional guidance that outlines which costs should be capitalized,
including both direct and indirect costs. This new guidance should align with that of Notice
2007-43 from the prior iteration of § 30C, and it should build on prior guidance to provide
further detail and be tailored to the specific requirements and uses of alternative fuel refueling
property. The guidance should confirm that federal capitalization rules under § 263A apply,
requiring taxpayers to capitalize all direct and most indirect costs related to the production of the
refueling property.5 Direct costs encompass materials integral to the property, such as hardware
(e.g. display, energy storage, power outlets), software (e.g. networking, charge management), and
installation costs. Indirect costs include labor, replacement hardware, construction (e.g. boring,
trenching, electrical connections), transaction, and transportation costs. This way, the true cost of
installing charging infrastructure can be considered when determining the appropriate credit
amount.
Low-population Census Tracts
In Notice 2024-20, Treasury specifically highlighted that it had not determined a clear
interpretation as to how the New Market Tax Credit (NMTC) rules under § 45D could be applied
to § 30C geographic eligibility. This section is important as it will influence which communities
can take advantage of the § 30C credit. Section 45D defines a census tract as a “low-income”
community through four metrics, one of which is § 45D (e)(4), “If a census tract has less than
2,000 individuals within it, it may be treated as low-income if: 1) it is in an ‘empowerment
zones’ as defined in Section 1931 AND 2) it is contiguous to another tract identified as low-
income.” The inclusion of low-population census tracts adjacent to low-income tracts in the §
30C program would open the program to industrial areas that are in urban areas and therefore
would be otherwise excluded from § 30C eligibility. Many industrial zones have low or no
population in terms of residents but are located adjacent to historically disadvantaged and low-
income communities. Extending the § 30C tax credit to these areas will help electrify freight in
areas with historically poor air quality often caused by diesel truck pollution. Performing a
2 Implementation Manual for Alameda County Incentive Project https://calevip.org/sites/default/files/docs/alameda-
county/implementation-manual.pdf
3 Request for Proposals Phase 2 Zero Emission Vehicle Infrastructure Program DC Fast Charging Stations Priority
Corridors GMS Program ID: NCDEQDAQ0007 https://www.deq.nc.gov/air-quality/mobile/volkswagen/phase-2/nc-
phase-2-zev-dc-fast-priority-corridors-program-rfp/download?attachment
4 Diesel Mitigation Trust Fund (DMTF) DC Fast Charging Grant Program Request for Applications
https://dam.assets.ohio.gov/image/upload/epa.ohio.gov/Portals/42/documents/DMTF/DMTF-EVSE-DCFC-RFA.pdf
5 Producer’s 263A Computation, https://www.irs.gov/pub/fatca/int_practice_units/producer_263a_computation.pdf
6

simple spatial analysis with publicly available data6, we have identified 10 census tracts7 that: 1)
do not currently qualify for the § 30C tax credit based on Treasury’s most recent maps; 2) have a
population of less than 2,000 individuals; 3) are within an “empowerment zone;” and 4) share
part of their border with one or more tracts that currently qualify for 30C via their status as an
NMTC low-income tract. To illustrate, one of these tracts (Census Tract ID = 24510250600) is
within the Port of Baltimore and contains many auto warehouses, logistics centers, a harbor, etc.
It is not “rural” despite the fact it has no residents, but it is not a high-income urban tract, and the
industrial activities it houses directly impact neighboring low-income communities. Ensuring
that tracts under § 45D (e)(4) are considered low-income aligns with Treasury’s guiding principle
for the implementation of the IRA of “ensuring that as many eligible taxpayers as possible
benefit from the incentives provided by the law while protecting against fraud and abuse.”
Thank you for your leadership in implementing key provisions of the historic IRA. In line with
the momentous nature of the law and spirit of the statute, we urge Treasury and IRS to issue
guidance on these final, necessary pieces, consistent with the recommendation contained in this
letter so taxpayers can access these tax credits to plan and make significant investments to install
charging infrastructure with the full certainty of clear finalized guidance.
Sincerely,
Max Baumhefner Jordan Brinn
Senior Attorney Clean Vehicles & Infrastructure Advocate
Natural Resources Defense Council Natural Resources Defense Council
Dan Bowerson Craig Segall
Senior Director, Environment & Energy Vice President
Alliance for Automotive Innovation Evergreen Action
Marco Sylvester Trisha Dellolacono
Policy Advisor Head of Policy
Powering America’s Commercial Transportation CALSTART
6 Using RStudio and R packages (primarily the ‘sf’ package), we started by joining census data from the American
Community Survey 2020 5-year (ACS5) to the existing 30C census tract data available to download from Argonne
National Lab (ANL). We then identified census tracts that did not qualify by either non-urban or low-income criteria
(as is noted in the ANL data) and that have a population of less than 2000 (determined using the joined ACS5 data).
Once we had this subset of tracts that currently do not qualify for 30C and have a population less than 2000, we used
joining functions to examine each of these tracts and find how many, if any, census tracts that qualify via their low-
income status (NMTC) share at least one point of their boarder with the tract being examined. We then added a
column to the dataset with the number of adjacent NMTC-qualifying census tracts. From there, we further joined
this dataset with HUD Empowerment Zone data (publicly available on the HUD Open Data Site). By the end of this
process, we had an CSV file that identified census tracts by ID number, state, and county, flagged via 0 for false, 1
for true each census tract’s 1) current 30C qualification status via non-urban, 2) current 30C qualification status via
low-income, and 3) population under 2000, and listed the total number of low-income qualifying tracts sharing a
boarder as well as HUD Empowerment Zone status. This file was filtered to identify the 10 tracts that we believe
should qualify via low-population status as determined by § 45D (e)(4).
7 11-digit FIPS codes for the identified tracts: 05119002500, 17031381200, 17031381700, 17031390100,
24510250600, 36061029700, 36061031100, 36067000100, 39061001000, 40109101200
7

Emily Kelly Margarita Parra
Senior Manager, Public Policy Director of Transportation Decarbonization
ChargePoint Clean Energy Works
Athena Motavvef Genevieve Cullen
Legislative Representative President
Earthjustice Electric Drive Transportation Association
Anne Blair Alice Henderson
Vice President of Policy Director & Lead Counsel, Transportation and Clean Air Policy
Electrification Coalition Environmental Defense Fund
Dan Schweizer, JD/MBA Vanessa Warheit
Head of Policy and Regulatory National Lead
Zeem EV Charging for All
Andrea Marpillero-Colomina, PhD. Steve Letendre
Sustainable Communities Program Director Senior Director of Regulatory Affairs
Green Latinos Fermata Energy
Kenneth W. Cooper Kelsey G. Johnson
International President Senior Lead Policy Advisor
International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers Rivian
Nathan King Darien Davis
Co-Founder/CEO Government Affairs Advocate, Climate & Clean Energy
Itselectric League of Conservation Voters
Paige Anderson Mahlon Aldridge
Director, Government Relations Vice President of Strategy
National Association of Convenience Stores Ecology Action
Albert Gore Ryan Gallentine
Executive Director Managing Director
Zero Emission Transportation Association Advanced Energy United
Jamie Hall Sven Thesen
Director of Policy Founder
EV Realty Project Green Home
Kevin Maggay Ingrid Malmgren
Senior Manager, Public Policy Policy Director
Navistar Plug in America
Kelsey G. Johnson Katherine Garcia
Senior Policy Advisor Director, Clean Transportation for All
Rivian Sierra Club
Clay Stranger Samantha Houston
Managing Director, Carbon-Free Transportation Senior Analyst
RMI Union of Concerned Scientists
Sam Vercellotti Chris Rall
Senior Policy Manager Outreach Director
TeraWatt Transportation for America
8

Raghav Murali Rachel Alland
Director, Policy and Government Affairs Transportation Director
EDF Powerflex American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy
Steven Montoya Adam Browning
Executive Director Executive Vice President, Policy & Communications
Transportation Energy Partners Forum Mobility
Michelle Avary Zach Woogen
VP External Affairs North America Interim Executive Director
Einride Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
Aravind Kailas Alleyn Harned
Advanced Technology Policy Director Executive Director
Volvo Group North America Virginia Clean Cities
Josh Cohen Jacqueline Altschuler
Head of Policy Manager, Federal Policy
SWTCH Energy Ceres
Jenifer Bosco David H. Fialkov
Senior Attorney Executive Vice President, Government Affairs
National Consumer Law Center (on behalf of its NATSO, Representing America's Travel Centers and Truck Stops
low-income clients) SIGMA: America's Leading Fuel Marketers
9