June 30, 2024
Hon. Michelle L. Phillips
Secretary
New York Public Service Commission
3 Empire State Plaza
Albany, NY 12223-1350
RE: Case 22-E-0236: Proceeding to Establish Alternatives to Traditional Demand-Based Rate
Structures for Commercial Electric Vehicle Charging
Comments of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC) on ConEd and O&R’s
Proposed Modifications to the Commercial Managed Charging Program
Introduction
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC) is a 501(c)(6) membership-based advocacy
group committed to advancing the role of electric vehicles (EVs) and vehicle-grid integration
(VGI) through policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the
transition to decarbonized transportation and electric sectors by ensuring the value from EV
deployments and flexible EV charging and discharging is recognized and compensated to
achieve a more reliable, affordable, and efficient electric grid.
ConEd and O&R (collectively, Companies) propose an important modification to the
commercial managed charging program (CMCP) to ensure a wider set of customers will be
eligible to participate in the program. Specifically, ConEd proposes to accept charging session
data rather than 15-minute interval data to ensure enrollment is not unnecessarily limited due to
the lack of customers with 15-minute interval data. To support this change, ConEd plans to apply
an adjustment factor to convert the session average demand into an estimated peak demand that
is then used to calculate the managed charging incentive.
VGIC generally supports the proposal to apply an adjustment methodology that will
facilitate the expansion of potential participants and further the goals of the CMCP. However,
VGIC offers the below enhancements to the petition.
1

VGIC recommends the adjustment factors be equal to the average demand discrepancy as
studied by the Companies.
The Companies state that “Session Average Demand calculation generally
underestimates demand by ~5% on average for L2 sites and ~9% on average for DCFC sites.”1
VGIC commends the Companies for conducting a thorough literature review and data analysis to
identify these values. VGIC recommends these average demand discrepancies serve as the basis
for the adjustment factors used to convert charging session data into estimated peak demand
data. In Appendix B of the petition, ConEd provides example calculations showing adjustment
factors for L2 and DCFC of approximately 5-20% and 10-20%, respectively. The methodology
in Appendix B details that ConEd will determine an adjustment factor that “1) provides
reasonable and appropriate operating cost relief and 2) minimizes the likelihood of over-
incentivization.”2 While minimizing the likelihood of over-incentivizing is a worthy objective,
VGIC is concerned that the example offered in Appendix B may be far too conservative and
likely result in significant under-incentivization for participating customers.
VGIC believes that it would be inappropriate to authorize an adjustment factor that
exceeds – and may be up to four times the magnitude of – the average demand discrepancy
without reasonable justification. The risk of under-incentivization would directly undermine the
goals of the CMCP and New York’s broader initiative to manage EV charging load.
With this in mind, VGIC respectfully recommends the Commission authorize the
Companies to proceed with the expanded eligibility approach with the modification that the
adjustment factor must be set equal to the average demand discrepancy as detailed by the
Companies in the petition (i.e., 5% and 9%). VGIC also recommends the adjustment factor be
revisited as additional data is collected and posits the upcoming consideration of the EV Phase-In
Rate may be an appropriate venue to address this.
VGIC recommends that future modifications to the Implementation Plan continue to
require Commission approval.
VGIC appreciates the Companies’ consideration given to the importance of flexibility
and agility in responding to the EV market and customer needs to prevent implementation delay.
Given that the approval of the charging session data adjustment factor that the Companies seek
within the petition would be a modification to the Implementation Plan, which is a significant
1 Petition of ConEd and O&R to Expand Data Eligibility Requirement for the Commercial Managed Charging
Program. Page 5.
2 Petition of ConEd and O&R to Expand Data Eligibility Requirement for the Commercial Managed Charging
Program. Appendix B: Session Data Adjustment Factor. Table 1: Sample Adjustment Factor Determination.
2

modification for the reasons stated above, VGIC prefers that Commission approval continue to
be required for any future modifications of the Implementation Plan. Although the Companies
note that eliminating approval would be consistent with the Implementation Plan protocol of
other similar programs, preserving existing input avenues that help to avoid meaningful
unfavorable changes through stakeholder input is also paramount to long-term program success.
Conclusion
VGIC looks forward to continued engagement with the Commission, Department of
Public Service Staff, the Companies, and other stakeholders to ensure the success of New York’s
transportation electrification efforts.
Respectfully submitted,
Zach Woogen
/s/ Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
(510) 665-7811
www.vgicouncil.org
3