August 27, 2024
California Air Resources Board
1001 I Street
Sacramento, CA 95814
RE: Comments of Vehicle Grid Integration Council on the Supplemental 15 Day Notices
The Vehicle Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) appreciates the opportunity to provide comments
on the California Air Resources Board’s (“CARB”) Proposed 15-Day Changes to the Proposed
Amendments to the Low Carbon Fuel Standard (“LCFS”).
VGIC supports the modifications being proposed by staff in these amendments to strengthen the
LCFS program. Given LCFS's success so far, increasing the program stringency is the right step
towards furthering its goals: driving California towards the use of cleaner fuels and decarbonizing
the transportation sector as a whole.
Additionally, as detailed in the below comments, VGIC supports:
1. Retaining the December 2023 update pre-approving electric distribution utility (“EDU”)
holdback funds to be used for VGI initiatives.
2. Clarifying that EDU holdback funds may be used for programs supporting both equity and
vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”).
3. Adding an option to allocate base credits to auto original equipment manufacturer
(“OEM”).
4. Ensuring OEM base credit revenue can also be used for VGI programs.
About VGIC
VGIC is a 501(c)6 membership-based advocacy group committed to advancing the role of electric
vehicles (“EV”) and VGI through policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC
supports the transition to a decarbonized transportation and electric sector by ensuring the value
from flexible EV charging and discharging is recognized and compensated to achieve a more
reliable, affordable, and efficient electric grid.
1

1. VGIC supports modifications to the utility holdback programs and allowing utilities
to use credits for vehicle-grid integration projects.
VGIC supports the modifications to the EDU holdback programs proposed in the original 45-day
amendments as retained in the 15-day updated language. The amendments reduce the amount of
base credits that California’s three large investor-owned utilities (“IOUs”) must spend on the
California Clean Fuel Reward program to 50% and allow more funding to flow to the IOUs’ utility
holdback programs. It is worth noting that while the California Clean Fuel Reward program was
paused several years ago due to low funding availability, significant funding has likely been
amassed but not yet implemented since that pause.
CARB proposes a list of equity projects utilities can spend funds on in section 95483(c)(1)(A)5a,
including investing in charging infrastructure, EV ridesharing, rebates and incentives for vehicle
purchases and leases, and investments in distribution infrastructure. Of critical importance to
VGIC and stakeholders working diligently to establish widespread vehicle-grid integration in
California, the amendments also provide a list of potential projects in 95483(c)(1)(A)5b that
utilities can spend non-equity funds on including:
i. Investments in grid-side distribution infrastructure necessary for EV charging.
ii. Support for vehicle-grid integration with projects such as:
I. Encouraging the optimization of EV charging through education in the following
areas: peak demand, rate pricing, grid emergencies, potential power shutoffs,
infrastructure deferral, renewable integration, and/or other signals and grid needs
to provide grid and customer benefits.
II. Providing program incentives to encourage driver participation in
monitored/managed charging, demand response, or vehicle-to-load / vehicle-to-
grid applications.
III. Supporting the deployment and installation of bidirectional charging
equipment.
IV. Other innovative approaches to promoting and managing EV charging and
discharging that provides benefits to customers and the grid.
iii. Hardware and software that decrease the cost of or avoid updates to infrastructure,
including load management software or outlet splitting.
VGIC strongly supports utilizing utility holdback funding for all of the VGI projects and load
management software outlined above. VGI can provide a wide range of benefits including the
following recognized by the California Public Utilities Commission (“CPUC”):1
1 CPUC Decision 20-12-029.
2

● Accelerating the adoption of EVs by providing additional revenue streams that lower the
total cost of vehicle ownership for individual owners and fleet operators.
● Reducing costs to electricity ratepayers by reducing congestion on existing power
distribution infrastructure and costly distribution system upgrades, as well as reducing the
need to invest in new fossil fuel electricity generation.
● Supporting further decarbonization of the electric sector by avoiding curtailment of
renewables and providing grid services.
● Accelerating reduction of carbon and criteria pollutant emissions in the transportation
sector.
● Improving grid resiliency and security, including for public safety power shutoff (PSPS)
events.
These are all benefits that LCFS revenues and the resulting holdback programs should support.
2. VGIC recommends modifications to clarify that utility holdback funds may be used
for programs that support both equity and vehicle-grid integration projects.
VGIC understands that the list of equity projects provided in 95483(c)(1)(A)5a are approved for
the utilities to spend equity funds on. The list in 95483(c)(1)(A)5b describes “examples of pre-
approved uses for these other holdback credit proceeds.” However, VGIC strongly recommends
CARB clarify that utilities can spend equity funds for the types of VGI projects listed in
95483(c)(1)(A)5b if they are for the benefit of equity customers. This change would inject much-
needed clarity not only to the EDUs tasked with designing programs but also to the CPUC, which
may otherwise inadvertently hamstring the EDUs’ ability to implement equity-focused VGI
programs. Put differently, CARB should clarify that EDUs may use holdback funds on initiatives
that simultaneously support the intents of 95483(c)(1)(A)5a (i.e., equity) and 95483(c)(1)(A)5b
(i.e., VGI).
3. VGIC supports allowing base credits to be allocated to the auto OEMs.
As discussed above, base credits have traditionally been generated by and allocated to the EDUs
to spend on the California Clean Fuel Reward program and utility holdback programs and projects.
However, the California Clean Fuel Reward program has been suspended since 2022 due to low
funds. CARB now proposes to pivot the program to focus on medium- and heavy-duty vehicles
instead of light-duty.
At the same time, funding light-duty and other projects may remain an appropriate policy direction.
VGIC supports allowing CARB to allocate up to 45% of base credits to the auto OEMs if less than
30% of model year 2024 new light-duty vehicle sales are ZEVs. Significant increases in light-duty
ZEV sales are needed to reach the Advanced Clean Cars II 35% sales requirement in 2026.
3

Allocating base credits to the OEMs to provide additional funding for the ZEV transition will allow
California to move towards its clean transportation goals.
If credits are allocated to the OEMs, VGIC supports pausing the requirement that EDUs continue
to the California Clean Fuel Reward program and allowing the EDUs to focus on holdback
programs. As discussed above, utility holdback projects can provide valuable incentives for EV
adoption, equity goals, and VGI initiatives.
4. VGIC recommends OEM base credits be eligible for the same pre-approved project
examples detailed for utilities in subsection 95483(c)(1)(A)5.
The Proposed Amendments outline the types of pre-approved projects for OEMs receiving base
credits in 95483(c)(1)(D)1. These are:
a. Additional rebates and incentives beyond existing local, federal, and state rebates and
incentives for purchasing or leasing new or previously owned EVs. The Executive Officer
may require that a portion of OEM base credit proceeds in a calendar year be spent on this
project type.
b. Installing EV charging infrastructure and subsidized EV charging plans.
c. Multilingual marketing, education and outreach [...]
d. Alternatively, OEMs may develop and implement other projects that promote
transportation electrification. These alternative projects are subject to approval by the
Executive Officer. [...]
VGIC recommends that this list be expanded to include the other pre-approved projects the utilities
are allowed fund under 95483(c)(1)(A)5, as discussed above. These projects also achieve the goals
of increasing EV adoption and further decarbonizing the transportation sector. OEMs should be
allowed to fund VGI projects in particular, as these projects can unlock broader benefits to electric
ratepayers and all Californians. Notably, OEMs, like EDUs, would not be required to use funds
for such initiatives. Instead, with this change, OEMs and EDUs would both be pre-approved to use
funds for such initiatives.
Conclusion
VGIC is overall supportive of the Proposed Amendments to LCFS and is excited to continue to
work with CARB on achieving California’s transportation decarbonization goals.
Sincerely,
4

/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
Vehicle Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
5