May 1, 2024
Andrew S. Johnston
Executive Secretary
Maryland Public Service Commission
William Donald Schaefer Tower
6 St. Paul Street, 16th Floor
Baltimore, Maryland 21202
Re: Case No. 9478; Comments of Vehicle-Grid Integration Council on the Evaluation of
Phase I Utility Programs
Dear Mr. Johnston,
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)1 respectfully provides its comments in response to the
Maryland Public Service Commission’s (“Commission”) April 2, 2024 Notice of Hearing
(“Notice”) in Case No. 9478, regarding Evaluation of Phase I Utility Programs.
I. Introduction
VGIC is a 501(c)(6) membership-based advocacy group committed to advancing the role of
electric vehicles (EVs) and vehicle-grid integration (VGI) through policy development,
education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to decarbonized transportation
and electric sectors by ensuring the value from EV deployments and flexible EV charging and
discharging is recognized and compensated to achieve a more reliable, affordable, and efficient
electric grid.
II. Comments
VGIC appreciates the continued reporting by Maryland utilities, including Baltimore Gas and
Electric, Potomac Edison Company, Potomac Electric Power Company, Delmarva Power &
Light, and Southern Maryland Electric Cooperative throughout the Phase I program cycle. These
reports highlight the effectiveness of many of the EV programs as well as lessons learned. In
VGIC’s view, the Phase I programs have met their intended goals, and the utilities should
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., BorgWarner,
Fermata Energy, Ford Motor Company, General Motors, Nissan Group of North America, Bidirectional
Energy, Customized Energy Solutions, dcbel, Eaton Corporation, Emporia Corp., EnergyHub, EV.Energy,
FreeWire Technologies, Inc., GridWiz, Kaluza, Landis + Gyr, Leapfrog Power, Inc., Nuvve Holding
Corporation, Peak Power, PowerFlex, Qcells, Stellantis N.V., Sumitomo Electric, The Mobility House,
Toyota Motor North America, Inc., WeaveGrid, Hoosier Energy, Peninsula Clean Energy, and
Sacramento Municipal Utility District. The views expressed in these Comments are those of VGIC, and do
not necessarily reflect the views of all individual VGIC member companies or supporters.
(https://www.vgicouncil.org/)
1

continue to extend and expand successful pilots and programs and develop new elements that
address evolving EV charging needs, create benefits for customers and communities, and
advance Maryland’s state policies focused on promoting transportation electrification and
reducing greenhouse gas emission.
EV adoption continues to increase in Maryland as the total number of registered EVs is nearly
100,000.2 If the electric vehicle transition is done right, the societal benefits will be significant.
An M.J. Bradley study commissioned by the Union of Concerned Scientists found that
accelerating the deployment of clean vehicles and fuels at scale could yield a net benefit of
almost $40 billion by 2050.3 However, the State of Maryland may not realize many of these
benefits if charging is not managed and largely occurs outside the low-cost times on the grid.
One common theme seen throughout the reports is participants’ interest and willingness to
charge during low-cost times. BGE has reached its enrollment cap on the home charging
incentive (2,500 customers) and now has 2,654 customers on its EV-only time-of-use (TOU) rate
and has effectively implemented its active managed charging demonstration with 2,804
customers enrolled, shifting charging to low forecasted PJM times and launching a new phase
which focuses on distribution asset protection.4 For Potomac Edison, the Company has enrolled
518 customers in its EV-only time-of-use rate leveraging EVSE and telematics options for
customers, where only nearly 80% of customers were satisfied with the accuracy of usage data.5
For Delmarva Power & Light Company and Potomac Electric Power Company (PHI Utilities),
the Smart Charge Management has demonstrated a significant reduction in on-peak charging.
PHI Utilities’ most recent semi-annual EV report highlights the benefits of active managed
charging, where charging is automated to align with PJM signals and minimize loading on
distribution assets, providing significant costs savings while further reducing non-coincident
peak.6 In Guidehouse’s Evaluation, the key findings for each program note the general off-peak
2 Maryland Department of Transportation. Number of Registered BEVs and PHEVs by County.
March 31, 2024. Online at:
https://experience.arcgis.com/experience/d8d908d9e62f4054b14ec8f6cbb5392b/page/Dashboa
rd-%26-Metrics/
3 Lowell, D., A. Saha, and C. Van Atten. 2018. Decarbonizing transportation: The benefits and
costs of a clean transportation system in the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic Region. M.J. Bradley &
Associates, LLC.
Online at: https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/attach/2019/02/Cost-and-Benefits-of-Clean-
Transportation-MD.pdf
4 Baltimore Gas and Electric Company. Electric Vehicle Program Phase II Proposal of Baltimore
Gas and Electric Company. May 24, 2023. Pg. 2 and Pg. 8.
5 The Potomac Edison Company. EV Phase II Program Proposal of The Potomac Edison
Company. March 1, 2024. Pg. 7 and Pg. 54.
6 PHI Utilities. Final Program and Semi-Annual Progress Report of Delmarva Power & Light
Company and Potomac Electric Power Company Regarding Implementation of Approved
Electric Vehicle Charging Program Offerings. March 1, 2024. Pg. 19 - 24.
2

benefits of the utilities’ programs with 80% or more of residential charging occurring during off-
peak (and some with 90% or more).7
It is our view that a combination of passive managed charging options, like time-of-use,
alongside active managed charging options, like the BGE and PHI Utilities’ Smart Charge
Management pilots, generate additional benefits is an important program design for providing
choice so that customers can participate based on the technologies customers have as well as
their preferences and mobility needs. We recommend that the Maryland PSC urge the utilities to
continue to include and expand managed charging offerings in the Phase II program proposals.
Furthermore, it is our understanding that there are timing sensitivities regarding the procedural
schedule, and the utilities’ ability to continually implement these programs. In particular, we are
concerned about managed charging offerings that are currently capped and may not be able to
run continuously through January 1, 2025, and beyond.
For instance, BGE has sought to expand the program beyond its current Smart Charge
Management demonstration phase to reopen enrollment in June 2024, allowing access to this
expanded program.8 Potomac Edison has also proposed continuing their Phase I programs in a
Phase II portfolio. 9
As an industry, we are fortunate in that there have been few pilots or programs that have had a
temporary discontinuance. Still, we are aware of the negative impacts of starting and stopping
programs because of the experience in related technology sets. The significant progress made by
the Maryland utilities with respect to EV program enrollment has been impressive, and VGIC
respectfully advises against interrupting that progress. The utilities should be encouraged to
extend and, where possible, expand the current offerings beyond January 1, 2025. This is critical
to make the most of the significant time, resources, and dedication that Maryland EV
stakeholders have put forth over the past five years.
Therefore, VGIC recommends that the Commission act urgently in developing a procedural
schedule to create the opportunity for the Commission to determine that these programs are in
the public interest and should be continued without major interruption.
III. Conclusion
7 Guidehouse Inc. Maryland Statewide Electric Vehicle Portfolio Evaluation. February 16, 2024.
Pg. 4-5.
8 Baltimore Gas and Electric Company. Electric Vehicle Program Phase II Proposal of Baltimore
Gas and Electric Company. May 24, 2023. Pg. 4.
9 The Potomac Edison Company. EV Phase II Program Proposal of The Potomac Edison
Company. March 1, 2024.
3

VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on these important issues.
Sincerely,
Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
(510) 665-7811
4