BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 21-06-017
Modernize the Electric Grid for a High (Filed June 24, 2021)
Distributed Energy Resources Future.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE
PROPOSED DECISION ADOPTING IMPROVEMENTS TO DISTRIBUTION
PLANNING AND PROJECT EXECUTION PROCESS, DISTRIBUTION RESOURCE
PLANNING DATA PORTALS, AND INTEGRATION CAPACITY ANALYSIS MAPS
Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
10265 Rockingham Dr.
Suite#100-4061
Sacramento, California 95827
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
Date: October 3, 2024

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 21-06-017
Modernize the Electric Grid for a High (Filed June 24, 2021)
Distributed Energy Resources Future.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE
PROPOSED DECISION ADOPTING IMPROVEMENTS TO DISTRIBUTION
PLANNING AND PROJECT EXECUTION PROCESS, DISTRIBUTION RESOURCE
PLANNING DATA PORTALS, AND INTEGRATION CAPACITY ANALYSIS MAPS
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) hereby submits
these comments on the Proposed Decision Adopting Improvements to Distribution Planning and
Project Execution Process, Distribution Resource Planning Data Portals, and Integration
Capacity Analysis Maps (“PD”) issued by Commissioner Houck on September 13, 2024.
I. INTRODUCTION.
VGIC commends the Commission for beginning the much-needed process of updating
California’s distribution planning paradigms and processes to accommodate the high amounts of
additional load and generation connecting to California’s distribution grid. While many sectors are
electrifying, transportation electrification, especially for medium- and heavy-duty vehicle sites, is
rapidly becoming one of the largest sources of new load with projects that often exceed several
megawatts (“MW”) and can be deployed with relatively short customer-side construction
timelines. Planning for and managing electric vehicle (“EV”) load is critical. California is currently
experiencing an energy affordability crisis, and while much of the increase in electric utility rates
to date has been driven by wildfire mitigation costs, distribution system upgrades will add
2

significant new costs. At the same time, new load and increased off-peak kWh sales may put
downward pressure on rates. Ensuring that kWh sales are maximized while distribution upgrades
are minimized to the extent possible is key to ensuring affordability. Notably, vehicle-grid
integration (“VGI”) initiatives that encourage more efficient use of electrical infrastructure, like
managed charging programs and bidirectional charging efforts, are one of the few tools in the
toolkit to unlock downward pressure on rates.
The PD makes many essential modifications to improve distribution optimization in the
long term. Generally, VGIC supports the PD’s distribution planning proposals, including better
incorporating known load data into distribution plans, utilizing more recent Integrated Energy
Policy Report (“IEPR”) load forecasts, extending the distribution planning horizon, and other
modifications to make distribution planning more proactive. VGIC also supports many of the
proposed modifications to the Integrated Capacity Analysis (“ICA”) maps and the focus of the
Commission on increasing accuracy for the Load ICA in particular. VGIC strongly supports the
Commission adopting our recommendation to establish a venue for regular discussion of the ICA
maps in the form of quarterly workshops.
However, the PD does not adequately consider the actions the utilities can take now to
allow additional EV load to come online in the near term and to further optimize the integration of
EV charging into the existing distribution system. In particular, flexible service connections and
Limited Load Profiles (“LLPs”) have the potential to enable additional load to come online in the
near term and provide data and experiences that can be used to optimize long-term VGI. To that
end, VGIC offers the following comments on the PD:
● The Commission should establish standardized flexible service connection offerings.
● The PD should enable the implementation of Limited Load Profiles in the ICA maps.
3

● The Electrification Impact Study (“EIS”) Part 2 Study should include multiple managed
charging scenarios and considerations for EV load mitigation strategies.
II. THE COMMISSION SHOULD ESTABLISH STANDARDIZED FLEXIBLE
SERVICE CONNECTION OFFERINGS.
The Commission has recently focused on energization timelines and ensuring that new
loads can connect to the grid in a timely manner. The Commission has taken action to implement
average and maximum energization timelines for the investor-owned utilities (“IOUs”), but
timelines for constructing grid upgrades are still multiple years long.1 VGIC strongly believes that
the Commission should take action to address near-term needs by enabling the widespread use of
flexible service connections. These connections allow customers to energize their load in a flexible
manner, typically to accommodate distribution grid constraints.
The Staff Proposal discusses flexible service connections as bridging strategies, stating that
projects triggering distribution upgrades can be energized “temporarily, until the upgrade is
completed, using temporary load flexibility via voluntary load curtailment for specific limited
times or DER assets such as mobile batteries.”2 As discussed in the PD, PG&E and SCE are
considering different flexible service connections and conducting pilots for different types of
bridging solutions. These plans should be further outlined for stakeholders, and VGIC supports
the PD’s requirement that the utilities submit their plans for bridging strategies by December 15,
2024. The Staff Proposal also recommends that the utilities provide updates on implementing their
plans in the annual DDOR. The PD adopts the requirement for utilities to provide a bridging
strategies proposal, but declines to require their implementation or annual reporting. The PD states
1 D.24-09-020 at 47.
2 Staff Proposal at 54.
4

that this is because “processes for long-term, scalable load management as a bridging solution do
not exist for evaluation and execution.”3 However, the Commission could begin the regulatory
process to gather proposals for evaluation.
The Commission should take broader action now to create widely available flexible service
connections in order to enable near-term and longer-term ratepayer savings. Flexible service
connections leverage technologies that are available today, and allow load to come online and
increase efficient use of existing electrical infrastructure. Critically, electrification projects
leveraging flexible service connections, by definition, add off-peak load, since service upgrades
need to be made to accommodate peak load. This makes flexible service connections one of the
only tools the Commission has to curb the outsized ratepayer impacts already felt by millions
of Californians. While important bridging solutions, the development of flexible service
connections will lead to the creation of different forms of Limited Load Profiles (“LLPs”), which
can be used to establish long-term agreements for flexible load.
Enphase has raised this issue in this instant proceeding and the Energization Timelines
proceeding (R.24-01-018), submitting motions to open a regulatory process to standardize flexible
service connections and implement LLPs.4 VGIC strongly believes that Enphase’s motion should
be approved in the Energization Rulemaking. Importantly, the Commission must not further
postpone addressing these issues by debating the proper regulatory venue for discussion. As the
Commission looks to expand the development of flexible service connections, the plans submitted
3 PD at 89.
4 Motion of Enphase Energy, Inc. to Amend Scoping Ruling and Schedule to Address Optional Flexible Connection
Agreements and the Underwriters’ Laboratory 3141 Standard for Power Control Systems in Investor-owned
Utilities’ Energization Rules filed by Enphase Energy in R.24-01-018 on September 11, 2024.
5

by the IOUs on bridging strategies can be used as the starting point for broader party proposals,
workshops, and other discussions.
III. THE PD SHOULD ENABLE THE IMPLEMENTATION OF LIMITED LOAD
PROFILES IN THE ICA MAPS.
VGIC encourages the Commission to direct the utilities to begin planning for incorporating
Limited Load Profiles in the Load ICA maps now. As discussed above, it is important for the
Commission to leverage widespread flexible service connections as soon as possible. It is likely
that this will take the form of LLPs with import limits that vary throughout the day, similar to the
Limited Generation Profiles (“LGPs”) with varying export schedules. The PD adopts Staff’s
recommendation to modify the ICA maps to enable straightforward customer creation of LGPs,
and VGIC recommends that the Commission also adopt plans to enable similar straightforward
integration for Limited Load Profiles.
Once a broader flexible service connection framework is adopted, customers will need to
have access to information on grid constraints throughout the day and year in order to decide
whether an LLP will work for them. Having data be publicly accessible in the Load ICA will be
the easiest way for customers to conduct their own inquiries into how different sites can utilize
LLPs. The ICA maps can also be valuable tools for utilities to use internally to gather information
to present to customers. VGIC supports the PD’s requirement for PG&E to utilize their Load ICA
to reduce the length of their intake process for energization applications. Broadly, VGIC sees a
future where both the utilities and customers utilize the ICA maps to aid in the implementation of
LLPs for a given site.
Given the amount of work and data that will be required to integrate LLPs into the ICA
maps, VGIC suggests that the Commission signal its intention to enable this use case in this
6

decision. This way, the utilities can provide updates on how they plan to implement LLPs in their
Annual Load ICA Refinements Reports. There may also be opportunities to leverage the work
being done for other Load ICA refinements or general ICA refinements to gather the necessary
information for LLPs, reducing the need for the IOUs to go back to collect this data later.
IV. THE ELECTRIFICATION IMPACT STUDY PART 2 STUDY SHOULD
INCLUDE MULTIPLE MANAGED CHARGING SCENARIOS AND
CONSIDERATIONS FOR EV LOAD MITIGATION STRATEGIES.
VGIC supports the inclusion of the Load Flexibility Assessment in Part 2 of the
Electrification Impact Study (“EIS”) being conducted by the utilities. The PD states that the Part
2 EIS will “estimate and assess potential impacts (e.g., potential costs of upgrading the primary
and secondary distribution grid) of meeting electrification needs under multiple scenarios.”5 VGIC
supports the inclusion of multiple scenarios in the Part 2 study, and we reiterate our previous
recommendations to include the following managed charging scenarios:
● Baseline EV Load Management, based on the assessment that has already been completed
in Part 1 of the study.
● Mid EV Load Management, based on updated IEPR assumptions compared to the Part 1
study, which reflect higher TOU rate participation from EVs.
● High EV Load Management, based on the inputs and assumptions for high EV load
management used in the June 2023 Updated Integrated Resource Planning Inputs and
Assumptions document.6
5 PD at 95.
6 Inputs & Assumptions, 2022-2023 Integrated Resource Planning (IRP), June 2023. https://www.cpuc.ca.gov/-
/media/cpuc-website/divisions/energy-division/documents/integrated-resourceplan-and-long-term-procurement-
plan-irp-ltpp/2023-irp-cycle-events-andmaterials/draft_2023_i_and_a.pdf
7

● High EV Load Management + EV Charger Export, based on the inputs and assumptions
used in the June 2023 Updated Integrated Resource Planning Inputs and Assumptions
document.7
It is clear that EVs will be adding a significant portion of the new load that is triggering distribution
upgrade needs, and it is therefore clear that management of EV charging load is key to reducing
the overbuild of the distribution system and reducing the ratepayer costs of this build out. For
example, the EIS Part 1 Study and Cal Advocates’ Distribution Grid Electrification Model
(“DGEM”) Study have drastically different cost estimates to upgrade the distribution system
because their assumptions around EV charging profiles differ, leading to varying load peaks and
distribution needs. Including multiple scenarios will allow the Commission and stakeholders to
evaluate how managing charging profiles can help reduce ratepayer costs. This will influence
California’s efforts to expand managed charging programs and provide a more thorough
assessment of the ratepayer costs and benefits for different managed charging initiatives.
For this reason, VGIC also continues to recommend that the Part 2 Study evaluate the
potential for software- and hardware-based solutions to manage EV charging load specifically for
local grid constraints (i.e., as opposed to system-level needs), including:
● Platforms to manage EV charging load on the distribution system.
● Site-level EV load management utilizing power-sharing software across several chargers
at a single customer site.
● Storage-backed EV charging and DER-paired EV charging.
7 Ibid.
8

This will provide California with valuable information about how to shape load and maximize
California’s ability to transition to EVs while also minimizing costs to ratepayers as much as
possible.
V. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments on the Proposed Decision.
We look forward to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: October 3, 2024
9