March 21, 2025
Email to: docket@energy.ca.gov
Docket Number: 22-RENEW-01
Subject: California Energy Commission Demand Side Grid Support Program Guidelines
RE: Comments of the Vehicle Grid Integration Council on the Demand Side Grid Support
Program Draft Guidelines, Fourth Edition and Option 4
Dear Sir or Madam:
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC) appreciates the opportunity to provide additional
comments on the Demand Side Grid Support (DSGS) Program Draft Guidelines, Fourth Edition
published by the California Energy Commission (CEC) and comments regarding the inclusion of
Option 4 in the program and potential overlaps with Pacific Gas and Electric’s (PG&E) Automated
Response Technology (ART) program.
Regarding DSGS Option 4: Emergency Load Flexibility Virtual Power Plant and PG&E’s
ART Program.
VGIC is supportive of the proposed DSGS Option 4, Emergency Load Flexibility Virtual Power
Plant Pilot, as an option for EVSE to provide emergency reliability to the state. With nearly 2
million EVs already sold in California and millions more expected, EVs represent an increasing
share of the state’s electric load. Given the diversity of mobility needs and charging behaviors, it
is critical that EV customers have access to a wide range of demand response (DR) programs that
align with their specific needs and internal cost-benefit calculations. Offering a variety of options
maximizes EV contributions to grid reliability by allowing customers to select programs that best
fit their operational preferences. Moreover, it promotes participation from customers who may not
respond to other load management measures, like whole-premise time-of-use rates that apply to
EV and non-EV load.
The DSGS program plays an important role in California’s demand response portfolio as the only
statewide emergency DR program available today. Unlike other DR initiatives (i.e., ART or the
Emergency Load Reduction Program), DSGS allows participation from all load-serving entities,
including publicly owned utilities, creating a uniform statewide option for DR aggregators and
customers. Importantly, DSGS, particularly Option 4, is designed as an emergency DR program,
with events triggered by Energy Emergency Alerts (EEA) and limited to a maximum of 60 hours
per summer season. This structure ensures the program is focused on critical reliability events
rather than routine load management.
1

PG&E’s ART program is a fundamentally different DR offering, as it integrates resources into the
CAISO wholesale market. ART operates year-round, allows for more frequent dispatch, and offers
a higher annual capacity incentive due to its expanded availability. This makes ART a valuable
tool for customers seeking to provide more consistent grid services. However, because ART is
administered solely by PG&E, it is not available to customers outside of PG&E’s service territory.
While both programs leverage smart technologies, including EVSE, to provide grid services,
VGIC does not view DSGS and ART as competing. Instead, different customers and aggregators
will naturally gravitate toward either program based on their operational needs and preferences.
Notably, the 2019-2020 Joint CPUC-CEC Vehicle-Grid Integration Working Group detailed over
1,000 VGI use cases. This demonstrates a rich diversity in the manners in which customers interact
with the grid through EVs and EVSE. Additionally, customers outside of PG&E may be weighing
a completely different, and potentially more limited, menu of DR options. A diverse and flexible
DR ecosystem is essential to ensuring that all capable resources, including EVs, are able to
contribute to grid reliability. Lastly, while PG&E ART, if successful, may serve as a model for
other load-serving entities to follow, it is unlikely that will occur in the next few years. For
example, if other investor-owned utilities were to propose a program based on ART, this would
need to be done via the 2028-2032 DR application cycle, which may be filed in 2027. Based on
the cadence of the previous two DR application cycles, these programs would not be approved by
the CPUC until 2028 and implemented until 2029.
With these factors in mind, VGIC therefore urges the CEC to adopt the DSGS guidelines, including
Option 4, at the next CEC Business Meeting to ensure that EVSE and other resources can support
California’s reliability needs as soon as possible.
Conclusion.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments and looks forward to collaborating
with the CEC and other stakeholders in this docket.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
Vehicle Grid Integration Council
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
2