September 22, 2025
Hon. Michelle L. Phillips
Secretary
New York Public Service Commission
3 Empire State Plaza
Albany, NY 12223-1350
RE: Case 18-E-0138: Proceeding on Motion of the Commission to Regarding Electric
Vehicle Supply Equipment and Infrastructure.
Comments of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
on Petition Requesting Eligibility Changes to the Medium- and Heavy-Duty Pilot
Introduction
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC) is a 501(c)(6) membership-based trade
association committed to advancing the role of electric vehicles (EVs) and vehicle-grid
integration (VGI) through policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports
the transition to decarbonized transportation and electric sectors by ensuring the value from
flexible EV charging and discharging is recognized and compensated to achieve a more reliable,
affordable, and efficient electric grid. VGIC appreciates the opportunity to comment on the
Petition Requesting Eligibility Changes to the Medium- and Heavy-Duty Pilot, filed May 23,
2025.
VGIC supports the Joint Utilities’ petition to expand eligibility for MHDV incentives.
Given the considerable size of the remaining budget allocated to support MHDV
customers and anticipated increase in MHDV deployments in coming years to meet customer
1

demand, VGIC strongly supports the Joint Utilities’ petition to expand eligibility for
MHDV incentives to shared hub models, projects outside of disadvantaged communities,
and projects without a TVIP, NYSBIP, NYCCTP, EPA CSB, or EPA CHDV voucher.
VGIC recommends that sites with bidirectional charging equipment have a higher share of
eligible customer side costs.
Bidirectional charging use cases can leverage the latent battery capacity in EVs to
provide backup power to customers, manage customer bills, and support the grid through
vehicle-to-grid (“V2G”) exports. Revenues from V2G exports can be even more important for
certain MHDV EVs compared to light-duty EVs, helping to offset the significant costs of
vehicles and associated charging infrastructure and making electrification projects more
financially viable. Ultimately, the extent to which V2G exports will support MHDV project
economics will be determined by vehicle routes, duty cycles, and customer preferences.
Bidirectional vehicles and EVSE are commercially available for the MHDV sector, with current
charging station offerings from Nuvve/Fermata, Heliox, InCharge, and Tellus Power Green and
vehicles from GM, Blue Bird, RIDE, Thomas Built Buses / Daimler, Green Power Motors, and
other MHDV providers. Several V2G projects currently participate in and receive compensation
from California’s Emergency Load Reduction Program and Massachusetts’ ConnectedSolutions
Daily Dispatch program. Moreover, the Joint Utilities maintain VDER tariffs for which V2G
customers are eligible.
Given the immense potential of V2G systems to support customer needs, bolster grid
reliability, and lower system costs, VGIC recommends offering an incrementally higher
share of eligible costs to these customers compared to sites with only unidirectional
charging equipment. This will help to partially offset the incremental upfront costs of
purchasing and installing bidirectional EVSE and the associated equipment, which are a
significant barrier given the relatively nascent state of the market, which has not yet benefited
from economies of scale in production and distribution. Based on VGIC’s discussion with
industry participants, there is an approximately 30% cost premium for a bidirectional EVSE for
2

MHDV sites compared to a unidirectional EVSE. VGIC believes offering to cover an
incrementally higher share of eligible costs is critical to spurring the nascent bidirectional
charging market in New York. VGIC offers itself as a resource and hopes to collaborate closely
with stakeholders to determine the appropriate incentive level for bidirectional charging
equipment. However, covering 80% of customer-side costs for bidirectional sites, as opposed
to the 50% for unidirectional sites, may help to offset the current ~30% premium that
these sites face. Ultimately, the goal of such market transition support for bidirectional
charging customers is to reduce ratepayer costs by mitigating distribution system
upgrades. This would help to offset VGIC’s proposed incrementally higher incentive for
bidirectional sites. VGIC recognizes the critical need to balance forward-looking initiatives and
investments in a diverse long-term energy toolkit with maintaining affordability for all utility
ratepayers. With this in mind, we believe that if the Commission does adopt an incrementally
higher incentive for bidirectional charging sites, it could also consider additional ratepayer
protection measures. For example, the Commission could request an attestation that the site will,
in fact, be used in bidirectional mode.
In addition, while V2X solutions have demonstrated clear benefits to both customers and
the grid across the country, the technology is new and unfamiliar to many customers. To
overcome this gap, VGIC recommends that the MHDV pilot marketing, education, and outreach
and technical assistance teams work to educate customers on the benefits of bidirectional
charging use cases, capable chargers, vehicles, and associated equipment, appropriate
interconnection pathways, applicable rates and programs, and any technical considerations,
including opportunities to co-locate and integrate other types of distributed energy resources.
Given the potential complexity of interconnecting relatively large bidirectional MHDV sites, the
utilities’ technical assistance teams should – in a technology-neutral manner – actively support
individual customers and fleets through the design and interconnection process and ensure a
streamlined customer experience.
3

VGIC recommends that applicants be provided with education about flexible service
connection options.
Flexible service connection refers to the use of behind-the-meter software (e.g., power
sharing algorithms, power control systems, etc.) or hardware (e.g., integrated or co-located
battery storage, linear generators, etc.) approaches to limit EV charging demand at the service
connection to a predetermined level below the aggregated charging capacity of the EVSE. For
example, a charging site with five 150 kW DCFCs can use these technologies to limit its peak
demand to 600 kW, compared to a nameplate aggregate peak demand of 750 kW. This can help
avoid or defer the need to upgrade certain customer-side and utility-side make-ready
infrastructure to accommodate the new charging load. The reduced need for infrastructure
upgrades can generate savings for the customer installing EV charging and, critically, all
ratepayers. The potential savings from these flexible service connections can be considerable
given the significant infrastructure needs of MHDVs. These solutions are also particularly
valuable given New York’s commitment to proactive planning frameworks – flexible
service connection provides a complimentary tool to accelerate EV energization while also
providing the potential to mitigate upward pressure on rates. Additionally, flexible service
connection can be used to overcome physical space constraints in locations where it is difficult to
upgrade electrical equipment. This can also rapidly accelerate installation and energization
timelines.
The enabling technologies for flexible service connection are mature and already being
deployed today, and therefore should be considered in all near-term activities related to MHDV
electrification. Specifically, VGIC urges the Commission to direct utilities to ensure
education about these flexible service connection options be provided to prospective and
accepted MHDV make-ready pilot participants, including education about both software
and hardware-based solutions. This education should be prioritized and more actively provided
to site designs that would trigger particularly long lead times for utility-side upgrades. This
education should also align or potentially refer customers to the Load Management Technology
Incentive Program (LMTIP), which can supplement MHDV pilot funding as it relates
specifically to the enabling software- and hardware-based solutions.
4

Conclusion
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments and looks forward to
working with the Commission, the joint utilities, and other stakeholders to ensure the success of
New York’s transportation electrification efforts.
Respectfully submitted,
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
www.vgicouncil.org
5