BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION OF THE
FILED
STATE OF CALIFORNIA
10/27/25
04:59 PM
Application of Southern California Edison A2403019
Company (U 338-E) to Establish Marginal Application 24-03-019
Costs, Allocate Revenues, and Design Rates.
JOINT REPLY COMMENTS OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EDISON COMPANY
(U 338-E), CALSTART, INC., SMALL BUSINESS UTILITY ADVOCATES, SOLAR
ENERGY INDUSTRIES ASSOCIATION AND VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION
COUNCIL IN SUPPORT OF VEHICLE TO GRID RATE PROPOSAL SETTLEMENT
AGREEMENT
WILLIAM BRIGGS
RYAN JERMAN
Attorneys for
SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EDISON COMPANY
2244 Walnut Grove Avenue
Post Office Box 800
Rosemead, California 91770
Telephone: (626) 302-4632
E-mail: Ryan.Jerman@sce.com
Dated: October 27, 2025

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION OF THE
STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Application of Southern California Edison
Company (U 338-E) to Establish Marginal Application 24-03-019
Costs, Allocate Revenues, and Design Rates.
JOINT REPLY COMMENTS OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EDISON COMPANY
(U 338-E), CALSTART, INC., SMALL BUSINESS UTILITY ADVOCATES, SOLAR
ENERGY INDUSTRIES ASSOCIATION AND VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION
COUNCIL IN SUPPORT OF VEHICLE TO GRID RATE PROPOSAL SETTLEMENT
AGREEMENT
Pursuant to Rule 12.2 of the California Public Utilities Commission’s (Commission)
Rules of Practice and Procedure (Rules), and Assigned Administrative Law Judge Marcelo
Poirier’s October 14, 2025 email ruling extending the deadline to submit these Joint Reply
Comments to October 27, 2025, Southern California Edison Company (SCE), CALSTART, Inc.
(CalStart), Small Business Utility Advocates (SBUA), Solar Energy Industries Association
(SEIA), and Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC), (referred to herein as the Settling
Parties)1 submit these Joint Reply Comments in support of the Vehicle to Grid Rate Proposal
Settlement Agreement (Settlement Agreement), filed September 5, 2025.2 Settling Parties
respond to the Comments of the Public Advocates Office (Cal Advocates) in opposition to the
Settlement Agreement, filed October 6, 2025.
1 The Settling Parties are all the signatories to the Settlement Agreement. Pursuant to Rule 1.8(d) of
the Commission’s Rules of Practice and Procedure, the Settling Parties authorize SCE to submit these
Joint Reply Comments on their behalf.
2 The Settlement Agreement is Attachment A to the Motion for Adoption of the VGRP Settlement
Agreement, which was also filed on September 5, 2025.
1

I.
INTRODUCTION
On September 5, 2025, after extensive negotiations, Settling Parties filed a joint motion
in support of a Settlement Agreement that resolves SCE’s Vehicle to Grid Resource Proposal
(VGRP).3 VGRP is a new program for SCE, which will provide significant benefits to the grid
and help meet California’s greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions reduction goals.4 There are
expected to be 7.1 million electric vehicles in the state by 2031.5 On average, these vehicles will
be used for transportation only a fraction of each day, creating a potential grid resource that,
“if tapped effectively, could help address the burgeoning challenges facing the grid as it
integrates increasing volumes of renewable energy sources.”6 Now is the ideal time to
implement VGRP and begin tapping this resource for three reasons: (1) technology has advanced
to the point that bi-directional capabilities (through which an electric vehicle can take power
from the grid and put power onto the grid) are increasingly becoming available, and are expected
to be included in the majority of new electric vehicles sold by 2026; (2) customers are
increasingly aware of vehicle-to-grid resources; and (3) SCE’s customers have expressed interest
in participating in a vehicle-to-grid resource program.7
The Settlement Agreement includes detailed requirements for VGRP, including eligibility
criteria, a participation cap, and two rate options based on whether the customer’s bi-directional
electric vehicle is the sole exporting resource at the service address (Rate Option 1) or the
vehicle is paired with another exporting resource under an existing Net Energy Metering (NEM),
Net Energy Metering Successor Tariff (NEM-ST), or Net Billing Tariff (NBT) configuration
(Rate Option 2).8 The Settlement Agreement also includes detailed export compensation
3 SCE’s as-filed VGRP is described at Exhibit SCE-04, pages 121-138 and Exhibit SCE-04A,
pages 120-137.
4 Ex. SCE-04, p. 121; Ex. SCE-04A, p. 120.
5 Id.
6 Ex. SCE-04, p. 122; Ex. SCE-04A, p. 121.
7 Ex. SCE-04, pp. 125-126; Ex. SCE-04A, pp. 124-125.
8 Settlement Agreement, pp. 6-7.
2

requirements, which differ based on the rate option the customer is eligible for and, if Rate
Option 2 applies, whether the customer has an NBT paired resource or a NEM or NEM-ST
paired resource.9 The VGRP compensation for all customers is based on “the average hourly
weekday and weekend Avoided Cost Calculator (ACC) values applied to NBT exports, also
referred to as Energy Export Credit (EEC).”10
Cal Advocates opposes only one aspect of the Settlement Agreement: the ACC-based
compensation provision. Its opposition lacks merit, ignores CPUC precedent, and fails to
recognize the substantial benefits that will be achieved from adopting the Settlement Agreement
as a whole, without modification. Below, Settling Parties summarize the conclusive evidence
demonstrating that Cal Advocates’ opposition should be rejected and that the Settlement
Agreement is consistent with the law, reasonable in light of the whole record, in the public
interest, and should be approved.
II.
LEGAL STANDARD
Rule 12.1(d) provides the standard of review applicable to the Settlement Agreement:
“The Commission will not approve settlements, whether contested or uncontested, unless the
settlement is reasonable in light of the whole record, consistent with law, and in the public
interest.” The Commission has a policy of favoring settlements.11 When a party opposes a
portion of a settlement, as Cal Advocates does here, the “Commission considers whether [the]
settlement is just and reasonable based on the agreement as a whole, not on individual
provisions.”12 The Commission does not “attempt to second-guess and re-evaluate each aspect
9 Settlement Agreement, pp. 7-9.
10 Id., p. 5.
11 D.25-01-042, pp. 8-9.
12 Id. at 9.
3

of the settlement, so long as the settlement[] as a whole [is] reasonable and in the public
interest.”13
III.
DISCUSSION
Cal Advocates fails to apply the Commission’s standard for review of settlements
because it attacks a single provision of the Settlement Agreement rather than the agreement as a
whole. In addition, contrary to Cal Advocates’ claims, the Settlement Agreement’s ACC-based
export compensation provision is consistent with Commission precedent and is superior to Cal
Advocates’ preferred compensation mechanism, dynamic rates. For all these reasons, the
Commission should reject Cal Advocates’ opposition and approve the Settlement Agreement.
A. Cal Advocates Fails To Apply The Commission’s Standard For Review of
Settlements
As Settling Parties explained in the Joint Motion for adoption, the Settlement Agreement
is consistent with the law and substantial record evidence demonstrates it is reasonable in light of
the record and in the public interest.14 SCE, SEIA, and VGIC all explained the benefits of
adopting a vehicle-to-grid program in testimony.15 SCE testified that utilizing electric vehicles
as a resource will “support grid stability and reliability, promote energy efficiency, and enhance
customer value”16 and SEIA testified to the benefits to the grid and to electric vehicle owners of
adopting VGRP,17 as did VGIC.18
13 D.25-01-042, p. 36, quoting D.04-12-017, pp. 9-10. See also D.07-11-018, p. 6 (“We consider
individual settlement provisions in our assessment of settlements but, in light of strong public policy
favoring settlements, we do not base our conclusion on whether any single provision is the optimal
result. Rather, we determine whether the settlement as a whole produces a just and reasonable
outcome.”).
14 Motion of SCE and Settling Parties for Adoption of the VGRP Settlement Agreement, pp. 7-9.
15 See Ex. SCE-04, pp. 121-138; Ex. SCE-04A, pp. 120-137; Ex. SEIA-01, pp. 54-62; Ex. VGIC-01,
pp. 11-17.
16 Ex. SCE-04, p. 127; Ex. SCE-04A, p. 126.
17 Ex. SEIA-01, pp. 54-55.
18 Ex. VGIC-01, pp. 2-10.
4

Cal Advocates did not oppose this testimony. Its opposition to the Settlement Agreement
rests instead on its disagreement with the export compensation mechanism. It believes dynamic
export credits are a better alternative for export pricing than the ACC19 and that “a rate design
tying export credits to the ACC and static forecasts risks under- or over-compensating EV
owners.”20 According to Cal Advocates, “the record does not reflect that the ACC is a better
alternative to dynamic export credits.”21
These positions are factually incorrect, as Settling Parties explain in the sections below.
In addition, Cal Advocates has not shown, as a matter of law, that the Settlement Agreement
should be rejected because Cal Advocates has not shown that the Settlement Agreement as a
whole is unjust or unreasonable. The Commission does not “attempt to second-guess and re-
evaluate each aspect of the settlement, so long as the settlement[] as a whole [is] reasonable and
in the public interest.”22 The fact Cal Advocates may believe dynamic pricing is optimal to
ACC-based compensation is insufficient grounds for rejecting or modifying the Settlement
Agreement.
B. Contrary To Cal Advocates’ Claims, The Export Compensation Provision is
Consistent With Commission Precedent and Policy
1. Use Of The ACC In VGRP Is Consistent With Commission Precedent
Regarding Export Compensation
The Commission adopted ACC-based pricing for exports in D.22-12-056, which
addressed NBT, the successor tariff to NEM. Cal Advocates attempts to characterize that
decision as “a one-off application to address the high subsidies from Net Energy Metering,”23
19 E.g., Cal Advocates Comments, p. 1.
20 Cal Advocates Comments, p. 4.
21 Cal Advocates Comments, p. 1.
22 D.25-01-042, p. 36, quoting D.04-12-017, pp. 9-10. See also D.07-11-018, p. 6 (“We consider
individual settlement provisions in our assessment of settlements but, in light of strong public policy
favoring settlements, we do not base our conclusion on whether any single provision is the optimal
result. Rather, we determine whether the settlement as a whole produces a just and reasonable
outcome.”).
23 Cal Advocates Comments, p. 2.
5

but the decision itself provides no support for this characterization. To the contrary, the
Commission’s Findings of Fact regarding the ACC are just as applicable to VGRP as to NBT:
• “This decision previously found that basing retail export compensation rates
on Avoided Cost Calculator values brings the cost of the successor tariff
closer to its value. Hence, using averaged monthly values for retail export
compensation rates also ensures the tariff is based on the generator’s true costs
and benefits to the grid, thus leading to equity among all ratepayers while
maximizing the value of the generation to all customers and to the grid.”24
• FOF 98: “Using the Avoided Cost Calculator approach will ensure the costs
and benefits are approximately equal.”
• FOF 99: “Using the Avoided Cost Calculator approach leads to positive
outcomes for customers and nonparticipating ratepayers.”
• FOF 100: “With the exception of the 2020 version of the Avoided Cost
Calculator, the calculator has consistently reflected the value of exported
energy from year to year.”
• FOF 101: “Using Avoided Cost Calculator values to set retail export
compensation rates will ensure the retail export compensation rate is based on
the benefits provided to the electric grid and will reduce the cost shift.”25
Further, in D.22-12-056 the Commission considered the same claim Cal Advocates
makes here, that the ACC is not intended to be used for ratemaking.26 The Commission rejected
the claim.27 Moreover, in D.22-12-056, the Commission established two standards applicable to
rate designs intended for Distributed Energy Resource (DER) applications: (1) the net billing rate
structure that provides asymmetric pricing for exports and (2) export compensation based on a
24 D.22-12-056, p. 142.
25 D.22-12-056, FOFs 98-101, p. 216.
26 Cal Advocates Comments, pp. 2-5.
27 D.22-12-056, p. 102 (addressing arguments that “the Avoided Cost Calculator was not designed to
inform rate design…this approach exceeds the tool’s capabilities”) (internal quotation omitted).
6

forecast of avoided costs in the form of the ACC. Together, these policy changes marked a
departure from the NEM framework and set the standard for DER rate designs going forward.
VGRP is consistent with both of these standards because VGRP is a net billing rate structure
with export compensation based on the ACC.
Under a net billing structure all delivered energy is charged at the retail rate and exports
are compensated at a rate that approximates the utility’s avoided costs. The net billing structure
established the precedent for asymmetric pricing of imports and exports, where imported energy
is charged at a value that includes marginal and non-marginal costs while export energy is
compensated at the marginal costs or a value that approximates marginal costs. Asymmetric rate
designs are more equitable and accurate from a pricing perspective because, as Cal Advocates
itself explained in the NEM successor proceeding, “net billing will disassociate export
compensation from the retail rate, thus providing a more objective and transparent approach.”28
Asymmetric pricing, with export compensation that approximates avoided costs, has now been
extended to all net billing and virtual net billing rates provided by the three large investor owned
utilities (IOUs), as well as dynamic rates through D.25-08-049. In that decision, the Commission
recognized that asymmetric pricing is now a well-established precedent and that it achieves a
basic principle of net billing rates: “The asymmetric approach avoids cost shifting and ensures
revenue neutrality, cost-reflectivity and strong load-shift economic incentives in a manner that
aligns with past Commission precedent.”29
D.25-08-049 also accepted use of the ACC as a forecast of avoided costs. ACC values
were determined to be an appropriate option for Marginal Generation Capacity Costs (MGCCs),
and the decision cites alignment with the NBT as a key consideration: “[T]he IRP proceeding
establishes and updates key input values for the ACC, including the capital cost of generation
resources that is used to derive MGCCs. This is particularly important because the bi-annual
28 Id., p. 100.
29 D.25-08-049, p. 96.
7

updates to the ACC determine the calculations for NBT retail export compensation.”30
The Settling Parties similarly took this alignment into consideration when developing VGRP,
and therefore structured the rate with asymmetric pricing and set the net billing export
compensation at the same avoided cost value as provide to NBT applications.
For these reasons, Cal Advocates’ assertion that D.22-12-056 was not precedential for
rate designs intended for DER applications like VGRP is unsupported by the decision and should
be rejected.
2. VGRP Uses The Commission Adopted Framework For Export
Compensation In The Net Billed Tariff
The Settling Parties developed the agreed-upon VGRP to align with the Commission’s
current policies regarding net billed rate designs. In doing so, the existing NBT export
compensation framework was used. Cal Advocates’ claim that the Settlement Agreement seeks
to redefine the role of the ACC31 is simply not true, given VGRP is using the same Energy
Export Credit (EEC) previously defined for the NBT.
EECs are hourly-based monetary credits applied to the amount of electricity a customer
exports to the grid. These credits are calculated using the ACC, which determines the value of
electricity based on time-of-day, weekday/weekend, and seasonal factors. The Settlement
Agreement describes VGRP export compensation in this way: “The EV Export compensation for
both configurations will be the average hourly weekday and weekend Avoided Cost Calculator
(ACC) values applied to NBT exports, also referred to as Energy Export Credit (EEC).”32
This passage makes clear that VGRP is not redefining the role of the ACC but rather continues
the practice of applying EEC to net billed tariffs established in D.22-12-056. The hourly
30 Id., p. 47.
31 Cal Advocates Comments, p. 3.
32 Settlement Agreement, p. 5.
8

granularity of EEC values was specifically intended to encourage the use of storage DERs in
conjunction with solar; EVs, of course, are a storage-based DER.33
Using EECs to value exports is especially important for VGRP because it provides a
transparent and easy-to-understand compensation mechanism. “To catalyze the adoption of
[vehicle-to-grid] technology and move beyond the realm of pilot projects, it is necessary to
establish a clear and equitable compensation framework – a rate option that delineates a
transparent and user-friendly pricing schedule, will empower customers to make informed
decisions regarding the acquisition of bidirectional charging equipment and integrating their
vehicles with the grid in providing energy export retail services.”34 In contrast to EEC-based
pricing, pricing in dynamic rate pilots, as recommended by Cal Advocates, is less transparent
and “offers no pathway for stakeholders to assess the accuracy of the price signals.”35
Cal Advocates does not reference EEC in its Comments, and repeatedly refers to export
compensation being based on the ACC. Cal Advocates may have misunderstood that the
Settlement Agreement incorporates only EECs. To resolve any confusion, the Settling Parties
affirm here that export pricing will be based only on EECs, consistent with D.22-12-056.
3. The Settlement Agreement Is Consistent With Commission Policy
Cal Advocates claims settlements should not be used to formulate Commission policy.36
It also claims that “[a]dopting export credits based on a tool that was not designed for ratemaking
purposes risks misaligning compensation with actual system needs, thereby discouraging
efficient customer behavior and undermining vehicle-to-grid adoption.”37 The implication that
the Settlement Agreement somehow violates Commission policy, or establishes new policy, is
unsupported and should be rejected.
33 See D.22-12-056, at p. 142: “This approach [hourly EEC values] also yields more accurate signals for
customer generators to reduce imports from the grid and for battery storage to dispatch during the
hours that are most valuable to the grid.”
34 Ex. SCE-04, p. 122; Ex. SCE-04A, p. 121.
35 Ex. VGIC-01, pp. 28-29.
36 Cal Advocates Comments, p. 2.
37 Id., p. 4.
9

VGRP is consistent with Commission decisions and policy supporting grid reliability and
GHG reductions. The CPUC, along with the California Energy Commission (CEC), has played
“a pivotal role in developing pilots, programs, and services that enable flexible resources like
[electric vehicles] to integrate with the grid while supporting the broader policy objectives of the
State, including achieving the State’s clean energy goals and addressing affordability
concerns.”38 SCE summarizes these Commission-approved programs in its direct testimony
volume SCE-04, at pages 123-125.39 The Settlement Agreement is consistent with this policy, as
reflected in CPUC decisions, and advances it by adopting a more permanent vehicle-to-grid
option for SCE’s customers.
Cal Advocates does not cite record support for its contention that the export credit
mechanism may undermine vehicle-to-grid adoption. In contrast, signing parties testified that
ACC-based compensation would, in fact, support vehicle-to-grid adoption.40 Further, Cal
Advocates’ contention is belied by D.22-12-056, in which the Commission found that export
pricing based on the ACC balances a host of interests, including transparency and ensuring costs
and benefits are approximately equal.41
Finally, Cal Advocates’ claim that policy should not be set in a settlement agreement is
inapposite because the Settlement Agreement by its very terms does not ask the Commission to
adopt new policy: it provides (consistent with Commission Rule of Practice and Procedure 12.5)
that the Settlement Agreement is non-precedential and that Settling Parties are free to take
different positions on any of the issues resolved in the Settlement Agreement in future
proceedings.42
38 Ex. SCE-04, p. 123; Ex. SCE-04A, p. 122.
39 Also, Ex. SCE-04A, pp. 122-124.
40 See Ex. VGIC-01, pp. 28-29, Ex. SEIA-01, pp. 56-60.
41 See D.22-12-056, pp. 100-106, FOFs 96-106, pp. 216-17.
42 Settlement Agreement, p. 13 (Section 12). This section of the Settlement Agreement contains a typo.
It should provide that Settling Parties may advocate a position that is inconsistent with this
Agreement in Phase 2 of SCE’s 2029 GRC, rather than the 2025 GRC.
10

C. Cal Advocates’ Preferred Export Compensation Option—Dynamic Pricing—Is
Inappropriate For VGRP
1. The Dynamic Rate Pilot Uses Hourly Retail Level Prices For Dynamic Loads
And Export Compensation Based On The ACC
Cal Advocates recommends the use of SCE’s Dynamic Pricing Rate Pilot for export
compensation, claiming “dynamic rate pilots, such as SCE’s Expanded Pilot authorized in
Decision (D.) 24-01-032, provide a more accurate price signal to customers than the ACC”43 and
“[a] more prudent outcome would be to expand existing dynamic rate pilots and continue to test
export credits based on a dynamic price signal.”44 Cal Advocates implies SCE’s dynamic prices
are set at marginal costs, which is not the case. In fact, SCE has designed its hourly dynamic
rates for the pilot at a retail level. SCE’s dynamic rate is described in the two applications45 filed
by SCE in 2024, to which Cal Advocates is a party and is aware of SCE’s rate design approach
to dynamic rates. Putting aside the fact VGRP represents a net billing rate and not a dynamic
price rate, Cal Advocates’ proposal to compensate exports at a retail rate level rather than an
avoided cost rate is counter to the Commission’s direction regarding export compensation in
D.25-08-049, where the Commission stated that export compensation rates should be
asymmetric46 and thus not reflect any scaling associated with retail rates. Using the dynamic rate
pilot is not consistent with the Commission’s direction and therefore not appropriate for the
VGRP export rate.
Cal Advocates is mistaken as to how customers with energy exports are compensated
under the pilot. Participating customers are served on their existing rate schedules for the
subscription portion of load. The dynamic portion of the load is served on hourly dynamic rates
that are not applied to exports. Under this framework, and consistent with D.22-12-056, NEM
and NBT customers are compensated for exports at the same export rate as if they were not
43 Cal Advocates Comments, pp. 2-3.
44 Id., p. 3.
45 A.24-06-014 and A.24-12-008.
46 D.25-08-049, p. 95.
11

participating in the pilot. Therefore, for exports, NEM and NEM-ST customers receive their
respective retail level compensation and NBT customers receive compensation based on the
ACC. This is consistent with the Settlement Agreement, and counter to Cal Advocates’ apparent
understanding that exports are compensated at a marginal dynamic rate level. As VGRP is a
form of net billing in a paired storage arrangement, VGRP customers will also be provided with
export compensation based on the ACC. The pilot maintains compensation for NEM and NBT
customers under the current frameworks as the exploration of different compensation levels for
NEM and NBT is not a goal of the pilot. Additionally, there are statutes and regulations that
restrict deviations from the current methods of export compensation for NEM/NEM-ST and
NBT customers.47 These restrictions contributed to SCE’s decision to use ACC-based export
compensation for net billed vehicle-to-grid arrangements.
Excluding non-marginal costs from the export compensation rate is consistent with the
Commission’s policy regarding export compensation, for good reason: “As noted by Cal
Advocates and the Joint IOUs, export prices that incorporate non-marginal costs would lead to
cost shifts to non-participating customers.”48 Using the EEC for VGRP export compensation is
consistent with the Commission’s policy while recognizing that vehicle-to-grid exports avoid
similar costs as energy exported from other DERs. Using technology agnostic pricing has the
added benefit of being a cost-effective approach as existing systems and processes can be used.
Therefore, should the Commission adopt Cal Advocates’ proposal, the outcome would be the
same as the Agreement reached by the Settling Parties.
2. Dynamic Pricing Rate Design Principles Are Not Applicable To VGRP
The Commission should reject Cal Advocates’ suggestion that VGRP must comply with
Demand Flex Design Principle 6.49 Demand Flex Design principles are not relevant to VGRP
for the simple reason that the VGRP rate is not a dynamic pricing rate. VGRP represents a net
47 See D.22-12-056, pp. 13-14 (identifying statutory and regulatory guidelines).
48 D.25-08-049, p. 95.
49 Cal Advocates Comments, pp. 3-4.
12

billing structure similar to the NBT structure adopted by the Commission in D.22-12-056, where
export compensation is based on the ACC.50 NBT structures apply the retail rate to all delivered
energy and compensate exports at a value less than the retail rate that approximates the utility’s
avoided cost. The Settlement Agreement continues this practice by applying the same ACC
based pricing to VGRP export energy while pricing delivered energy at the Otherwise
Applicable Tariff (OAT). This differs dramatically from dynamic pricing rates where a portion
of the load is served on a subscription basis at standard retail rate and another portion of the
delivered load is served on functional, hourly dynamic rates.
The appropriate Rate Design Principles (RDP) applicable to VGRP are those adopted in
D.23-04-040, and51 the Settling Parties considered all of the D.23-04-040 RDPs in reaching the
Agreement. RDPs 4-6 and 8 are most relevant to VGRP:
• RDP 4 – Rates should encourage economically efficient (i) use of energy, (ii)
reduction of GHG emissions, and (iii) electrification;
• RDP 5 –Rates should encourage customer behaviors that improve electric system
reliability in an economically efficient manner;
• RDP 6 – Rates should encourage customer behaviors that optimize the use of existing
grid infrastructure to reduce long-term electric system costs; and
• RDP 8 – Rates should avoid cross-subsidies that do not transparently and
appropriately support explicit state policy goals.52
IV.
CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated above, the Settling Parties respectfully request that the
Commission find the Settlement Agreement is reasonable in light of the record, consistent with
50 SCE Tier 1 AL 5170-E and 5170-E-A codified the term “Energy Export Credit” or EEC in SCE’s
tariffs.
51 See D.23-04-040, COL 3, p. 35 (“The Electric Rate Design Principles should be followed in the event
of any perceived conflict between the Electric Rate Design Principles and the Demand Flexibility
Design Principles.”).
52 D.23-04-040 p. 2.
13

law, and in the public interest. The Commission should approve the Settlement agreement and
reject Cal Advocates’ Comments in opposition.
Respectfully submitted on behalf of the Settling Parties,
WILLIAM BRIGGS
RYAN JERMAN
/s/ Ryan Jerman
By: Ryan Jerman
Attorneys for
SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EDISON COMPANY
2244 Walnut Grove Avenue
Post Office Box 800
Rosemead, California 91770
Telephone: (626) 302-4632
E-mail: Ryan.Jerman@sce.com
Dated: October 27, 2025
14