Cole Jermyn
Senior Attorney, Clean Affordable Power
Environmental Defense Fund
1875 Connecticut Ave NW
Washington, DC 20036
cjermyn@edf.org
(202) 572-3523
Date: December 5, 2025
VIA Email
Hon. Michelle L. Phillips
New York Public Service Commission
Three Empire State Plaza
Albany, New York 12223-1350
Re: Case 18-E-0138 – Proceeding on Motion of the Commission Regarding Electric
Vehicle Supply Equipment and Infrastructure
Dear Secretary Phillips:
Environmental Defense Fund hereby submits for filing in the captioned docket comments on
behalf of itself, Interstate Renewable Energy Council, New York Battery and Energy Storage
Technology Consortium, and Vehicle-Grid Integration Council in response to the November 6,
2025 Notice Soliciting Comments regarding issues related to the interconnection of electric load.
Respectfully submitted,
257 Park Avenue South EDF.org A vital Earth. For everyone.
New York, NY 10010 T 212 505 2100

STATE OF NEW YORK
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION
______________________________________________
Proceeding on Motion of the Commission
Regarding Electric Vehicle Supply Case 18-E-0138
Equipment and Infrastructure
______________________________________________
COMMENTS OF ENVIRONMENTAL DEFENSE FUND, INTERSTATE RENEWABLE
ENERGY COUNCIL, NEW YORK BATTERY AND ENERGY STORAGE TECHNOLOGY
CONSORTIUM, AND VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON NOTICE
SOLICITING COMMENTS REGARDING ISSUES RELATED TO THE
INTERCONNECTION OF ELECTRIC LOAD
I. Introduction
On March 14, 2024, Con Edison filed its “Straw Proposal for Streamlined Queue
Management in Electric Vehicle Make-Ready Program and Other Programs” (“Initial Proposal”).1
Department of Public Service Staff (“DPS Staff” or “Staff”) used this Initial Proposal to begin the
work of the Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Interconnection Working Group (“EVIIWG”), which
aims to “streamline identified difficulties and barriers that affect the interconnection of EVs, building
electrification, and any other associated processes that includes the interconnection application
queue, review, and approval process.”2 After a stakeholder process including ten EVIIWG meetings
over the course of 2024 and 2025 and an opportunity for informal written comments, Staff filed the
final version of the “Department of Public Service Staff Modified Proposal for Streamlined Vehicle
to Grid Queue Management in Electric Vehicle Make-Ready Program and Other Programs” (“Final
Proposal”) on April 11, 2025.3 Environmental Defense Fund (“EDF”), Interstate Renewable Energy
Council (“IREC”), New York Battery and Energy Storage Technology Consortium (“NY-BEST”),
1 Case No. 18-E-0138, Proceeding on Motion of the Commission Regarding Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment and
Infrastructure, Straw Proposal for Streamlined Queue Management in Electric Vehicle Make-ready Program and
Other Programs (Mar 15, 2024) [hereinafter “Initial Proposal”].
2 DPS, Electric Vehicles Infrastructure and Interconnection Working Group (EVIIWG) Mission, Governance &
Operations (March 2024), https://dps.ny.gov/system/files/documents/2024/02/eviiwg-governance-march2024-v2.pdf.
3 Matter No. 24-00339, In the Matter of EV Infrastructure Interconnection Working Group, Modified Proposal for
Streamlined Vehicle to Grid Queue Management in Electric Vehicle Make-Ready Program and Other Programs (Apr.
11, 2025) [hereinafter “Final Proposal”].
2

Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) and others filed formal comments on this proposal in
July 2025.
On September 19, 2025, the Public Service Commission (“Commission” or “PSC”) adopted
the Order Adopting Proposal for Queue Management with Modifications.4 As part of this Order, the
Commission directed Staff to “advance a solution that could thoroughly and systematically address
the interconnection of electric load, including the issues and solutions identified by the EVIIWG.”
On November 6, 2025, Staff issues a Notice Soliciting Comments on this topic.5 These comments
are responsive to that notice.
II. Recommendations
A. Flexible Interconnection
The Commission should adopt, and require the utilities to implement, a comprehensive
flexible interconnection framework. Leaving this topic to the utilities’ discretion will result in
patchwork programs with inconsistent effectiveness. By setting a programmatic baseline for the
options the utilities must offer, the Commission can ensure that all customers have the opportunity
to participate and that grid benefits are maximized.
Flexible interconnections can help facilitate a decarbonized energy future, particularly as
load from electric vehicle (“EV”) charging and other electric end-uses (e.g., data centers, building
electrification, etc.) is increasing quickly.6 By allowing customers to interconnect EV charging under
defined constraints, flexible interconnections can accelerate energization timelines, manage capacity
shortfalls, and defer or avoid costly upgrade distribution system upgrades. Additionally, flexible
interconnections can promote more equitable access to the grid and can contribute to downward
pressure on rates.
Flexible interconnections accelerate the energization process by allowing customers to
connect new resources under specific constraints more quickly. In both the medium and long-term,
flexible interconnections can continue to streamline the energization process by deferring—or
completely avoiding—costly and time-consuming grid upgrades, some of which can take years to
complete.7 Moreover, utilities traditionally rely on conservative assumptions to determine
4 Case No. 18-E-0138, Proceeding on Motion of the Commission Regarding Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment and
Infrastructure, Order Adopting Proposal for Queue Management with Modifications (Sep. 19, 2025)
5 Case No. 18-E-0138, Proceeding on Motion of the Commission Regarding Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment and
Infrastructure, Notice Soliciting Comments on Load Interconnection (Nov. 6, 2025).
6 See generally Casey Horan et al., Let’s Get Flexible: Considerations for Unlocking Grid Capacity Using Flexible
Interconnection (Feb. 2025), https://library.edf.org/AssetLink/q812pd5afr3hboi61cm503fprla5ge0p.pdf
7 See Case No. 24-E-0364, In the Matter of Proactive Planning for Upgraded Electric Grid Infrastructure, Petition of
3

customers’ energy requirements. By leveraging flexible connections and refining the process with
which utilities estimate customers’ actual needs, i.e., peak demand, load profile, etc., customers can
continue to make use of existing hosting capacity.
With respect to distribution capacity shortfalls, flexible interconnections can unlock existing
capacity and maximize potential for new and upgrading load, optimizing use of already available
resources. Similarly, at least some flexible interconnections can enhance grid resilience and
reliability by allowing utilities to dynamically respond to emergency grid events, such as peak
demand surges or unexpected outages, by limiting or curtailing resources as necessary. Furthermore,
by enabling smarter utilization of grid assets, flexible interconnections can facilitate the integration
of DERs, including both flexible loads like EVs, and flexible generation like distributed solar, further
strengthening grid stability and efficiency. In short, flexible interconnections can address grid
capacity shortfalls while supporting the transition to a more adaptive, resilient, and decarbonized
energy system. Lastly, flexible connection options may encourage adoption of customer-sited
generation and/or energy storage to meet site needs where a full grid connection is unavailable,
thereby supporting New York’s Energy Storage Target and broader CLCPA goals.
In this context, we recommend framing flexible interconnection options under two use
cases—bridging solutions and indefinite solutions—and three program designs: flat, scheduled, and
dynamic. Each of these is defined and described in more detail below.
i. Flexible Interconnections Can Serve as Both Bridging Solutions and Indefinite
Solutions
Flexible interconnections offer utilities an effective pathway both as bridging solutions that
can defer costly infrastructure upgrades and as long-term, indefinite arrangements that can fully
avoid certain investments. In the latter case, customers may elect to permanently limit their load as
a way to ensure faster energization and/or make more efficient use of existing grid capacity, reducing
the need for new infrastructure while enabling timely access to service. Taken together, both
strategies can help ensure more cost-efficient buildout of infrastructure and can put downward
pressure on rates.
When deployed as bridging solutions, flexible interconnections can help prevent
overbuilding and support more appropriately sized, cost-effective infrastructure investments. Often
New York State Electric & Gas Corporation and Rochester Gas and Electric Corporation for Approval of Urgent
Upgrade Projects and Associated Cost Recovery at 20 (Nov. 26, 2024); See also Consolidated Edison Company of
New York, Inc. Urgent Projects Proposal at 21.
4

referred to as “phased” or “ramped” connections, these arrangements apply temporary limits that
remain in place only until the utility completes the upgrades necessary to serve a customer’s full
requested capacity, at which point the customer’s load limit is stepped up. This approach allows
customers to energize sooner while ensuring that any eventual upgrades are appropriately justified
and aligned with actual system needs.
In contrast, indefinite flexible interconnection agreements are well suited for customers who
are willing to remain on constrained capacity limits permanently, or at least until they seek an
alternative arrangement from the utility. These long-term options can provide meaningful certainty
for both utilities and customers, optimize the use of existing assets, and help support a more efficient
and adaptable grid as electrification—including EV charging—continues to grow. That said,
indefinite arrangements will require consideration of potential mechanisms to compensate customers
for voluntarily limiting their load, as discussed more below.
ii. Flat, Scheduled, and Dynamic Flexible Interconnections
Utilities should offer customers a menu of flexible interconnection arrangements, including
at minimum flat, scheduled, and dynamic limit options. This will maximize program effectiveness,
as customers with greater operational flexibility can take advantage of options that provide access
to more grid capacity, while those with less flexibility can benefit from simpler, easier-to-implement
arrangements.
First, flat (or static) flexible interconnections incorporate a fixed, firm, load limit that does
not vary over time or in response to real-time grid conditions. This limit is set when the agreement
is executed and remains constant from year to year. Flat load limits are particularly well-suited as
interim, bridge-to-wires solutions in cases where a utility is planning or is currently constructing
upstream upgrades; once those upgrades are completed, the customer’s limit can be raised to reflect
the newly available capacity until full nameplate service is reached. These arrangements—often
referred to as “ramped” or “phased” connections—are already employed across the US through what
is known as construction service, but they have not yet been formally recognized as a tool for
accelerating energization timelines. Because flat load limits require no real-time communication or
advanced controls, they represent the simplest and most immediately deployable form of flexible
interconnection. Thus, flat limits offer a low-cost, low-complexity option for both utilities and
customers and can begin alleviating interconnection delays for EV charging and other electric end
uses in the immediate term.
5

Second, scheduled load limits provide firm capacity that varies over the course of a day based
on terms defined in a flexible interconnection agreement. These limits may take the form of hourly
values, broader time-block allocations, or other structured schedules that allow for predictable intra-
day variations. Scheduled limits can also incorporate monthly or seasonal adjustments to better
reflect shifting system conditions and customer needs. The most notable example of scheduled limits
is illustrated by Southern California Edison’s LCMS pilot, which operates based on preset limits
without any real-time communication with the customer, meaning the customer’s device is pre-
programmed to automatically regulate its power usage.8 Scheduled limits therefore offer customers
greater access to grid capacity during off-peak periods while providing clear, dependable parameters,
for managing load throughout the year.
Third, dynamic limits provide non-firm capacity that varies throughout the day and can be
tied to real-time or forecasted grid conditions. These limits enable the customer’s load to adjust
based on the actual state of the grid. For example, during system events or peak demand periods, a
customer’s maximum allowable load can be constrained within a defined range, providing flexibility
while maintaining grid stability. Pacific Gas & Electric instituted the most well-known dynamic
flexible interconnection pilot (FlexConnect), which has seen success among large charging station
developers such as Tesla and PepsiCo as well as stationary battery storage developers.9
Dynamic limits represent a more sophisticated approach to flexible interconnection with
benefits and tradeoffs. For example, dynamic limits best suit utilities with greater visibility into their
distribution systems, such as those that have deployed some form of a distributed energy resource
management system (“DERMS”), and those that have established granular hosting capacity analyses
and forecasting methods for expected electric loads like EVs, buildings and data centers. Such
system investments can be costly, but improved grid visibility also unlocks more grid capacity and
increases overall system efficiency and optimization. The active communication that dynamic
flexible interconnections require also enables utilities to exercise real-time, active control during
emergency events, enhancing system resilience. In contrast, a less sophisticated system tends to
require more conservative load assumptions to avoid the risk of running up on grid constraints.
8 SCE, Establishment of Southern California Edison Company’s Customer-Side, Third Party Owned, Automated Load
Control Management Systems Pilot (Advice Letter 5138-E and 5138-E-A) (January 16, 2023).
9 See generally PG&E, PG&E FlexConnect Pilot, https://www.pge.com/assets/pge/docs/clean-energy/electric-
vehicles/flexible-service-connection-pilot-overview.pdf. See also Jeff St. John, A new way to fix grid bottlenecks for
EV charging: flexible connection (Canary Media, Dec. 10, 2024),
https://www.canarymedia.com/articles/transmission/a-new-way-to-fix-grid-bottlenecks-for-ev-charging-flexible-
connection.
6

Importantly, utilities can implement some types of dynamic flexible interconnections without
sophisticated DERMS (e.g., through simple calculated and communicated export limits, or by
leveraging Advanced Metering Infrastructure), though a DERMS may be necessary where the utility
requires certain types of operational grid visibility.
Where utilities fall on the spectrum of what they can offer between a simpler, flat limit and
a more sophisticated dynamic limit will depend on the utility’s circumstances, including their
distribution system needs and their visibility into the system. Dynamic limits may require additional
investment in granular data and more sophisticated technology to manage load and ensure reliable
communication and grid safety, which will increase costs. However, a more dynamic limit can yield
significant benefits by unlocking grid capacity and increasing system efficiency and optimization.
Providing this menu of flexible options will require a baseline level of technical and
operational capability from utilities. In particular, some versions of dynamic, communications-based
flexible agreements—where import limits adjust in response to real-time or abnormal grid
conditions—may require deployment of a DERMS or equivalent platform capable of securely
communicating with participating customers’ equipment, though these systems may not be cost-
effective in the near-term. Alternatively, flat and scheduled options, and some more dynamic
options, can be offered before these tools are in place, providing customers with near-term pathways
for participation while utilities continue to build the operations needed for dynamic approaches.
These capabilities are essential for any flexible that relies on active, automated adjustments. In sum,
utilities can offer a spectrum of flexible interconnection options—from simple to more
sophisticated—that can be deployed both in the near term with minimal operational changes and,
over time, as part of broader grid-modernization and orchestration efforts.
iii. Flexible Interconnections Require Clear Procedural Criteria
The optimal flexible interconnection structure will ultimately depend on what a customer is
willing to accept, i.e., how much load reduction they can accommodate, for how long, and whether
the benefits outweigh any operational or cost-related tradeoffs. As a result, utilities and customers
must work collaboratively to identify arrangements that balance system needs with customer
priorities. At minimum, utilities should offer a clear menu of options to serve a range of customer
use cases and levels of flexibility. In addition, every flexible interconnection agreement should
contain clearly defined parameters, including guaranteed minimum load limits that customers can
rely on under all circumstances, regardless of system constraints or grid conditions. Utilities should
also consider key questions related to the customer journey and any marketing, education, and
7

outreach activities needed to facilitate access to flexible interconnection options. For example, does
the utility filter all customer energization requests such that sites with expected energization
timelines over a certain number of months are informed about flexible connection? Does the utility
market flexible interconnection to common developers, key accounts, and/or other customer groups
and await a customer’s election of flexible connection?
Moreover, widescale adoption of flexible interconnections—especially long-term or
indefinite arrangements where the utility does not build upgrades to eliminate capacity constraints—
will also require thoughtful price signals and incentives to encourage meaningful customer
participation. Since flexible interconnections can provide substantial system benefits, including
avoided or deferred upgrades, improved asset utilization, and reduced congestion, any associated
compensation structures should also reflect these. Thus, utilities should clearly define customer
eligibility, the conditions under which compensation incentives apply, and how those payments are
to be calculated. Doing so will not only encourage broader participation but also ensure that flexible
interconnections deliver their intended value to both customers and the grid.
B. Interconnection Timeline Tracking
To understand the pace at which load projects are progressing through the energization
process, the Commission should require utilities to track and report on timelines. This information
would provide critical insights into whether utilities are processing applications in a timely manner
to meet customer needs and state policy goals. Without this visibility, regulators and stakeholders
cannot identify baseline or expected timelines by project type and size across utility territories or
determine where streamlining may be necessary. And importantly, the state’s decarbonization
goals should help to inform whether current timelines are sufficient or whether other strategies are
warranted to speed up the process.
There are many factors regulators must consider when determining how timelines will be
tracked and reported, including what types of projects to track, how to track timelines, and
reporting format and frequency.10 These considerations will depend upon how the data will be used
by regulators to monitor for potential policy reforms that may be needed. Below, we provide
recommendations intended as a starting point that can be further refined through stakeholder
discussions.
10 See Environmental Defense Fund, Considerations for Energization Timeline Tracking (Oct. 2025),
https://library.edf.org/AssetLink/glr8184366kkn2w36h547i4mhh551c81.pdf.
8

i. Track and separate out EV charger applications.
For utilities, connecting load is not a new phenomenon. However, the types of load projects
connecting to the grid have expanded in recent years and now include increasing numbers of EV
chargers. The viability of these projects can be significantly impacted by the time it takes to
energize them. This can be due to the need to meet incentive deadlines or to match the timing of
vehicle delivery schedules or the shortened construction timeframes for customer-side
infrastructure as compared to residential or commercial building construction. Additionally, in
order to meet New York’s ambitious emission reduction goals, policymakers will need to
understand whether the transition to EVs is happening at a quick enough pace. For these reasons, it
is imperative to understand how long EV projects are taking to connect to the grid through regular
tracking and reporting.
We recommend tracking all EV charger applications and categorizing the data by end use if
all load projects are included. We also recommend breaking out small and large EV projects (e.g.,
projects less than 300 kilowatts and projects 300 kilowatts and above) to be able to compare
timelines across applications of similar sizes and complexities. Con Edison already tracks and
reports on timelines for EV charger projects 300 kilowatts and above through its Transportation
Electrification Interconnection Timeline Earnings Adjustment Mechanism, so this type of
categorization could complement and build on the reporting framework they already have in place.
ii. Start by tracking end-to-end timelines for ease of implementation.
Because a standardized set of steps has not been established across all regulated utilities,
regulators should begin by requiring end-to-end timeline tracking and reporting. End-to-end
timelines should include initial application submission through project energization. These
simplified timelines are easier to implement and provide regulators with enough information to
understand how quickly EV projects are moving through the full process. To ensure consistent
reporting across utilities, we recommend that regulators establish clear reporting requirements,
including a standardized reporting format and the data points utilities must provide.
One important consideration is how to account for partial energization of a project if the
applicant chooses to utilize a phased connection agreement. In this case, utilities should report on
both the date that the first phase of the project is energized and the date when the full project is
online. It might be best to separate out phased connection timelines from other project timelines to
avoid skewing the results for larger projects. If more data points are ultimately needed to assess the
efficiency of the process or help identify the source of delays, regulators can then consider whether
9

tracking timelines by process step and/or responsible party (i.e., the utility or applicant) would be
appropriate.
iii. Conduct a pace of energization study to determine whether policy reforms are
necessary.
Additionally, we recommend conducting an analysis to determine the pace of energization
needed to meet the state’s climate goals. With this information, regulators could then assess
whether current timelines are sufficient or whether further improvements are necessary. A pace of
energization study could be conducted by a state agency, such as the New York State Energy
Research and Development Authority, or an outside consultant. We recommend working with
stakeholders to assess currently available data that could be used and appropriate modeling and
outputs that would provide the most value to regulators.
C. Harmonizing Load and Distributed Generation Interconnection
Energy storage systems (ESS) paired with EV chargers can provide significant benefits
including immediate capacity to sites and is a load management technology that improves
managed charging, particularly for medium- and heavy-duty fleets. As discussed in the Grid of the
Future Flexibility Study, bidirectional EV chargers have incredible potential to unlock grid
flexibility “by shifting charging load to an off-peak time period, where the demand on the grid is
lower and the underlying costs to serve customers and/or grid greenhouse gas emissions are
lower.”11 Managing charging loads will become increasingly important with a growing EV fleet,
and bidirectional capability is an additional capability that can reduce strain on the grid. Presently,
deployment of bidirectional chargers is disincentivized by a burdensome interconnection process
and the lack of harmonization with the interconnection processes for unidirectional chargers paired
with ESS.
i. Address Misalignment of Timelines Between the EV Load Study and the SIR Process for
ESS.
Con Edison customers have identified a misalignment between the timing of the EV load
study by the e-mobility team and the standardized interconnectionr requirements (“SIR”) process by
the coordinated electric system interconnection review (“CESIR”) team. This misalignment is
detrimental to the customer setting up EV load paired with energy storage because an EV load study
may have a service determination and signed program agreement while a CESIR study is still in
11 GOTF Vol 3 p14.
10

progress. Because the CESIR study is ongoing, there may be changes in service determination,
which would affect the signed load agreement. This lack of transparency in service determination is
costly and time-consuming for developers. We recommend greater alignment between load and
generation/storage interconnection processes, which could be done through linking applications ID
numbers, offering a single utility point of contact, or offering a joint application, among other
solutions implemented by utilities in other states.
ii. Develop Transparency and Fairness for Bidirectional Charger Interconnection.
Beyond lack of transparency in service determination, bidirectional chargers are also
disadvantaged compared to unidirectional chargers in gaining available capacity at a substation, due
to lack of transparency in the interconnection queue. When a bidirectional charger paired with ESS
is undergoing interconnection review, a unidirectional charger can claim the available substation
capacity before the bidirectional project’s CESIR study is complete. This gives unidirectional
chargers an unfair advantage by effectively consuming capacity that the utility had indicated would
be available to the bidirectional project. A publicly accessible EV interconnection queue (including
load) would help developers plan electric vehicle supply equipment (“EVSE”) projects in
accordance with available capacity.
iii. Expand Communication Between Distributed Generation and EV Load Utility Teams
Customers of Con Edison have reported limited communication between the distributed
generation and EV load utility teams when interconnecting a bidirectional charger paired with ESS.
Increased transparency between the utility teams and the customer regarding project determination
and timelines is critical to advance the adoption of vehicle-to-grid (“V2G”) technology that will
benefit the EV fleet of the future.
iv. The ITWG should address both the distributed generation and load side of EV
interconnections
The EVIIWG has solely focused on load interconnection, while developing the EV Queue
Management Proposal, while the ITWG is focused on resources that provide energy. With increasing
capacity constraints at EV sites, developers will deploy distributed generation to provide load
management. Due to the lack of transparency in the interconnection process for distributed
generation paired with load, it is currently unattractive for developers to deploy load management
technology in a time when capacity constraints need to be managed. EV load directly interacts with
the interconnection process for bi-directional chargers at the same site; thus, the two processes
should be harmonized together in discussion at the ITWG.
11

D. Clarifying Vehicle-to-Home Interconnection Policy
As deployment of bidirectional charging systems becomes more common, it is increasingly
important for New York to distinguish between bidirectional charging systems operating in
bidirectional mode only when islanded and those enabled for parallel operation with the utility
grid. This distinction, not hardware capability alone, determines whether a bidirectional charging
system creates any risk of exporting during normal grid operations, and therefore, whether it should
trigger interconnection review.
The Department’s Notice Soliciting Comments in Case 18-E-0138 asks stakeholders to
identify barriers and solutions related to the interconnection of new electric loads, including those
associated with transportation electrification. As EV adoption accelerates, many customers will
install charging infrastructure that may also support optional bidirectional charging functionality.
Without clear regulatory guidance distinguishing bidirectional charging systems operating in
bidirectional mode only when islanded and those enabled for parallel operation, utilities may
treat a large and growing population of EV customers as requiring DER interconnection review,
even where those customers are simply installing charging load and not seeking grid-parallel
bidirectional charging operation. The resulting ambiguity directly affects the efficiency, speed, and
predictability of New York’s load interconnection process, and therefore fits squarely within the
questions DPS has asked stakeholders to address.
i. Systems Enabling Bidirectional Charging Only When Islanded Are Functionally
Equivalent to a Backup Generator
A bidirectional charging system operating in bidirectional mode only when islanded
functions by disconnecting the home from the utility grid before any power flows from the vehicle
to household loads. Technical evaluations confirm that islanding is achieved using a microgrid
interconnection device (“MID”) operating under strict “break-before-make” logic. The MID
physically opens the connection to the distribution grid, verifies isolation, and only then permits the
bidirectional charging system to energize the home. Laboratory testing conducted by EPRI has
validated and documented this sequence: upon grid loss, the MID disconnects, the inverter
transitions to grid-forming mode, and only after isolation is confirmed does power flow from the
vehicle through the EVSE to serve the home loads.12 When grid power returns, the inverter ceases
output before reconnection occurs.
12 Electric Power Research Institute (February 2024) Vehicle-to-Home (V2H) System Backup Power Performance
Evaluation: Lab Assessment of Ford F-150 Lightning and Ford Intelligent Backup Power System, available at
https://www.epri.com/research/products/000000003002029045.
12

Other jurisdiction that have examined this architecture in detail have come to similar
conclusions. For example, the Michigan Public Service Commission Rules that Ford’s bidirectional
charging system operating in bidirectional mode only when islanded from the grid “will not operate
in parallel with the utility’s distribution system” and therefore does not require interconnection
authorization.13 The underlying technical testimony emphasized that multiple layers of software
gating, hardware isolation, and commissioning verification ensure that these systems cannot export
when the grid is energized.14
ii. Systems Enabled to Operate in Bidirectional Mode in Parallel to the Grid Remain
Distinct and Certainly Require Interconnection
Systems enabled in bidirectional mode when operating in parallel with the grid, whether for
grid-parallel export (i.e., for credit under a tariff or program) or grid-parallel non-export (i.e., to meet
site load, mitigating the consumption of energy from the grid), are fundamentally different than
systems operating in bidirectional mode only when islanded. They require:
• activated software across the vehicle, EVSE, and inverter;
• phase-synchronized control logic;
• protection settings compliant with IEEE 1547;
• certification to UL standards to ensure compliance with IEEE 1547 requirements; and
• utility authorization prior to enabling grid-parallel bidirectional charging capability.
These systems should continue to follow New York’s DER interconnection process to ensure the
safety and reliability of the grid.
iii. Why This Distinction Matters for Improving the Load Interconnection Process
Without clear rules, utilities may default to treating any “bidirectional-capable” EV as a
potential DER, creating unnecessary DER interconnection applications for what are, in practice,
loads with optional islanded backup use. This would slow down DER interconnection queues,
tremendously increase review burden on utilities (e.g., every EV or EVSE routed to a
generation/storage interconnection process15), and create confusion for customers who are not
13 Michigan Public Service Commission Case No. U-21619 (March 2025) Declaratory Ruling, available at https://mi-
psc.my.site.com/sfc/servlet.shepherd/version/download/068cs00000f4FyXAAU.
14 Michigan Public Service Commission Case U-21619 (September 2024) In the Matter of the request for a declaratory
ruling by Ford Motor Company regarding home backup power and Michigan’s interconnection rules, available at
https://mi-psc.my.site.com/sfc/servlet.shepherd/version/download/068cs000009GJJIAA4.
15 Nissan, Ford, GM, Tesla, Kia, Volvo, and Polestar currently offer compatibility with bidirectional charging
systems. Honda, Hyundai, Rivian, and Lucid have announced offering this capability in the near-term. BMW,
Mercedes-Benz, and Stellantis have also made public statements regarding bidirectional charging features.
13

seeking any functionality beyond charging their vehicles. To support DPS’s goal of making load
interconnection more efficient, New York should explicitly define:
• Use Case 1: Bidirectional Charging Enabled Only When Islanded – operates strictly when
isolated from the grid; no parallel operation possible based on software gating, hardware
isolation, and/or commissioning verification; no generation/storage interconnection review
needed.
• Use Case 2: Bidirectional Charging Enabled When Operating in Parallel- with the Grid –
enabled for bidirectional charging parallel to the grid, either exporting (i.e., for credit under
a tariff or program) or non-exporting (i.e., to meet site load, avoiding consumption from the
grid); full interconnection review required.
Providing this clarity will reduce administrative burden, ensure alignment across utilities, and
protect the DER interconnection queue from unnecessary volume as EV adoption accelerates. As
customer adoption of bidirectional charging systems become more common, it is increasingly
important for New York to distinguish between these two types of systems.
III. Conclusion
EDF, IREC, NY-BEST, and VGIC thank the Commission for the opportunity to submit these
comments and urge it to take action in support of load interconnection consistent with the
recommendations outlined above.
Bidirectional charging products marketed for the light-duty vehicle market are available from Ford/Sunrun, GM
Energy, dcbel, Tesla, and Wallbox, while ChargePoint, Autel, Emporia, Enphase, and SolarEdge have announced
forthcoming bidirectional charging systems. Nearly every school bus manufacturer offers bidirectional charging
compatibility with one or several chargers from Tellus Power Green, InCharge, and Heliox.
14

__________________
Cole Jermyn
Senior Attorney, Clean Affordable Power
Environmental Defense Fund
__________________
Mari Hernandez
Director, Regulatory Program
Interstate Renewable Energy Council
________________________________
Steve Letendre, PhD
Senior Advisor
Vehicle Grid Integration Council
____________________________
Dr. William Acker
Executive Director
New York Battery and Energy Storage
Technology Consortium
15