DOCKETED
Docket Number: 24-TRAN-03
Project Title: 2024 Zero-Emission Vehicle Infrastructure Plan
TN #: 261642
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC) Comments - VGIC
Document Title: Comments on 2024 Draft Zero-Emission Vehicle Infrastructure
Plan
Description: N/A
Filer: System
Organization: Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
Submitter Role: Public
Submission Date: 2/7/2025 4:23:46 PM
Docketed Date: 2/7/2025

Comment Received From: Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
Submitted On: 2/7/2025
Docket Number: 24-TRAN-03
VGIC Comments on 2024 Draft Zero-Emission Vehicle
Infrastructure Plan
Additional submitted attachment is included below.

February 7, 2025
Email to: docket@energy.ca.gov
Docket Number: 24-TRAN-03
Subject: 2024 Draft Zero-Emission Vehicle Infrastructure Plan
RE: Comments of the Vehicle Grid Integration Council on the 2024 Draft Zero-Emission
Vehicle Infrastructure Plan
Dear Sir or Madam:
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC) appreciates the opportunity to provide comments
on the 2024 Draft Zero-Emission Vehicle Infrastructure Plan (ZIP) published by the California
Energy Commission (CEC) on January 15, 2025.
VGIC submits the following comments:
● Clean Transportation funding plans should target incentives for charging site developments
that utilize VGI solutions.
● Level 2 and DC Fast Charging (DCFC) will both be needed to ensure optimal customer
experience and costs.
● Modifications should be made to some assumptions in the CEC’s Business Case for Light-
Duty EV Charging.
CLEAN TRANSPORTATION FUNDING PLANS SHOULD TARGET INCENTIVES FOR
CHARGING SITE DEVELOPMENTS THAT UTILIZE VGI SOLUTIONS.
As California electrifies its transportation sector, significant new electrical load will be added to
California’s grid, creating opportunities to leverage EVs to not only decarbonize transportation,
but also support the evolving electric power sector, apply downward pressure on electric utility
rates through reduced infrastructure costs, ensure community resilience, and foster economic
activity. However, without an intentional focus on unlocking these benefits, the EV transition may
only serve to increase the net peak load on the grid as a whole and, notably, trigger significant
distribution infrastructure upgrades in locally constrained areas of the grid.
To mitigate these challenges, it is critical that California leverage vehicle-grid integration (VGI)
strategies, which the CEC defines as “technologies and strategies that alter the time, charging level,
or location of charging in a manner that benefits the grid while ensuring driver needs are met.”1
1 CEC, Assembly Bill 2127 Second Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure Assessment: Assessing Charging Needs
to Support Zero-Emission Vehicles in 2030 and 2035 (Second AB 2127 Report) at p.88.
1

The formal California VGI definition, as adopted by the California Public Utilities Commission in
Decision 20-12-029 pursuant to Senate Bill 676, includes discharging:
“Electric vehicle grid integration” means any method of altering the time, charging level,
or location at which grid-connected light-duty electric vehicles, medium-duty electric
vehicles, heavy-duty electric vehicles, off-road electric vehicles, or off-road electric
equipment charge or discharge, in a manner that optimizes plug-in electric vehicle or
equipment interaction with the electrical grid and provides net benefits to ratepayers by
doing any of the following:
(A) Increasing electrical grid asset utilization and operational flexibility.
(B) Avoiding otherwise necessary distribution infrastructure upgrades and
supporting resiliency.
(C) Integrating renewable energy resources.
(D) Reducing the cost of electricity supply.
(E) Offering reliability services consistent with the resource adequacy requirements
established by Section 380 or the Independent System Operator tariff.
To further simplify references to VGI solutions throughout these comments, we offer the following
graphic:
As has already been detailed by the CEC, “VGI could provide significant benefits to the electrical
grid and customers,”2 and “[w]idespread VGI (and load flexibility generally) will help achieve
2 Ibid at p.89.
2

California’s climate and decarbonization goals.”3 In addition to minimizing long-term distribution
upgrade costs, VGI can help accelerate charger deployment in the near term, allowing the state to
meet its climate and air quality mandates more quickly.
Despite the importance of VGI strategies in reaching California’s charging infrastructure
deployment goals, the ZIP offers little discussion of the topic beyond a high-level acknowledgment
that it could make charging more profitable and benefit both customers and the grid. The final ZIP
should address this gap by outlining specific opportunities to target Clean Transportation Program
funding to accelerate VGI solution deployment. Incremental funding for VGI solutions would also
help offset the high $800 interconnection fee required for bidirectional charging projects in
investor-owned utility territories, which is further discussed below.
One key area of opportunity to support VGI solutions in the ZIP is providing incremental funding
for managed charging and bidirectional charging systems, which individually require additional
software and hardware investments upfront but can significantly reduce the overall costs of
integrating EVs into California’s electric grid in the long-term.
Regarding flexible service connection and DER-paired charging, the CEC has offered support to
some extent, but it has been inconsistent, which creates uncertainty and mixed regulatory signals
for solution providers. For example, demand management software is an eligible cost in
Communities in Charge, but costs for co-located energy generation, such as battery energy storage
or solar are explicitly ineligible.4 EnergIIZE for medium and heavy-duty vehicles has a similar
treatment of including “charge management software” as an eligible cost but not physical DERs.5
On the other hand, CALeVIP’s Golden State Priority Project did allow solar and storage systems
to be included as eligible project costs, although these projects were still subject to the same per
port incentive cap as projects that did not leverage DERs.6 To maximize the benefits of VGI, the
CEC should ensure that flexible service connection technologies, including charge management
systems and/or paired DERs are eligible for funding across all Clean Transportation Program
initiatives and consider providing incremental incentives for projects that integrate grid-supportive
VGI solutions.
Bidirectional charging systems remain in the early stages of deployment and face relatively high
installation costs, including more expensive hardware and the highest DER interconnection fees
3 Ibid.
4 Communities in Charge Project Implementation Manual Funding Wave 3 at p.23. Available at:
https://thecommunitiesincharge.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/11/Communities-in-Charge-Implementation-Manual-
Funding-Wave-3-ADA.pdf
5 See the EnerGIIZE eligible equipment here: https://www.energiize.org/infrastructure
6 Center for Sustainable Energy, Implementation Manual for Golden State Priority Project at p.10. Available at:
https://calevip.org/sites/default/files/docs/golden-state-priority-project-north-south/gspp2-implementation-
manual.pdf
3

in the nation, $800 per interconnection application for California’s investor-owned utilities. This
fee is roughly ten times the national average. While the CEC has made progress in supporting
bidirectional charging through the Demand Side Grid Support (DSGS) program, these programs
alone are insufficient to cover the high upfront costs of bidirectional charging equipment. To
accelerate adoption, VGIC recommends that additional incentives be provided to offset the higher
upfront costs of bidirectional charging systems. Increased funding will be crucial in unlocking the
full potential of bidirectional EV resources, including the opportunity to reduce ratepayer costs
through deferring and avoiding generation and distribution capacity upgrades, integrate renewable
energy, and reduce the total cost of EV ownership for customers. These incremental incentives are
especially critical in these early years of market development.
Specifically, the CEC can encourage customer adoption of these solutions by supporting
incremental incentives for bidirectional charging systems through Clean Transportation Program
block grants and scalable rebate application programs. While the Zero-Emission School Bus and
Infrastructure Program (ZESBI) currently offers incrementally higher incentives for bidirectional
DCFC equipment, several key funding gaps remain. First, ZESBI does not offer incremental
incentives for non-DCFC bidirectional charging equipment. Several existing, UL-certified
bidirectional DC chargers operate at lower power levels (i.e., non-DCFC) and can meet the needs
of certain school bus fleets. Second, no other CEC funding program offers incremental incentives
for bidirectional charging systems. In fact, VGIC is only aware of one other opportunity in
California for bidirectional chargers to receive an incremental incentive for the bidirectional
capability.7 Incentivizing the deployment of this equipment through block grants and scalable
rebate application programs is preferred to ad hoc funding opportunities, which the CEC has
primarily used to support VGI solutions in the past. These funding opportunities are
administratively burdensome for solution providers, many of which are small companies and
startups that have limited resources but earnestly desire to support California’s grid through
bidirectional charging technologies.
LEVEL 2 AND DCFC WILL BOTH BE NEEDED FOR OPTIMAL CUSTOMER
EXPERIENCE AND COSTS.
In the Draft ZIP, the CEC asks for stakeholder feedback on whether to use a charger deployment
scenario that includes funding for both Level 2 and DCFC or a scenario that is DCFC-focused.
VGIC sees a need to support both Level 2 and DCFC charger deployment at this time, as both
charging types serve distinct needs and face unique deployment challenges.
7 PG&E’s V2X Pilots include an upfront incentive to achieve several goals, including helping offset the incremental
bidirectional charging equipment costs, partially mitigating the $800 interconnection application fees, and incenting
initial customer enrollment.
4

There is an important role for the “gas station model,” wherein infrastructure deployment centers
on EV drivers requiring faster charging speeds at public locations to meet mobility needs.
However, one of the largest benefits of deploying more DCFC is improving customer sentiment
about EVs generally and increasing the likelihood of consumers adopting EVs. Many drivers are
concerned about EV charging speeds and want to be able to fully charge their vehicle in 30 minutes
or less when needed.8 Adding additional DCFC throughout California with high charging speeds
will allow consumers to meet these charging needs during public outings or other scenarios such
as road trips. Widely available fast charging can also alleviate concerns around EV range, which
consumers have consistently raised.9 The CEC should consider the qualitative benefits of
deploying additional DCFC to improve the customer experience of EV ownership and address
concerns from customers who would switch to an EV if charging was more convenient.
Without broad customer acceptance of EVs, California will face difficulties meeting its EV
adoption goals. The CEC is currently planning for 7.1 million passenger EVs in 2030 and 15.2
million passenger EVs in 2035, greatly expanding charging demand.10 Meeting EV adoption
targets is critical to meeting California’s air quality and climate goals, including the mandate from
AB 32 that California be carbon neutral by 2045.
Additionally, significant amounts of federal funding have been allocated to deploy DCFC in
California through the National Electric Vehicle Infrastructure (NEVI) Formula Program and
Charging and Fueling Infrastructure (CFI) Grant Program. It is currently unclear whether all the
expected federal funding will be distributed to states and charging projects. If federal funding is
not available for DCFC as expected, the CEC should evaluate whether additional state funding for
DCFC is appropriate to fill this gap.
Level 2 charger deployment also remains critical in the next phase of EV adoption, as Level 2
charging continues to be less expensive to deploy than DCFC but provides significantly faster
charging than Level 1 outlets. The infrastructure required for Level 2 chargers often avoids
extensive distribution grid upgrades and associated costs that would be triggered by DCFC
deployment. This allows Level 2 charger deployment to be both less expensive and quicker to
install than DCFC.
Moreover, Level 2 chargers allow for the expansion of the “charge where you are model.”
Implementing Level 2 chargers in multifamily housing and workplaces addresses critical charging
needs, making EV ownership more practical and appealing for a broader range of individuals. The
8 See e.g., McKinsey, “Exploring consumer sentiment on electric-vehicle charging”, January 9, 2024. Available at:
https://www.mckinsey.com/features/mckinsey-center-for-future-mobility/our-insights/exploring-consumer-
sentiment-on-electric-vehicle-charging
9 Ibid.
10 Second AB 2127 Report at ii.
5

CEC has acknowledged this in the ZIP11 and VGIC supports utilizing funding to support
deployment of EV chargers at these sites. Critically, in these two charging locations, EVs are likely
to remain parked and plugged in for extended periods of time. This setup facilitates effective EV
load management and allows for the deployment of VGI technologies and more widespread
participation in VGI offerings (i.e., utility dynamic rates and programs like DSGS). Managed
charging programs can optimize EV charging to periods of low energy demand, high renewable
energy production, or other selected policy goals, in turn enhancing grid affordability, stability,
and efficiency while ensuring customer charging needs are met by the end of their time plugged
in. Furthermore, there is growing recognition of the importance of workplace charging to allow
EVs to capture excess solar generation during the daytime and shift that power to the early evening
when it can be injected back to the grid to reduce the net peak load.12
MODIFICATIONS SHOULD BE MADE TO SOME ASSUMPTIONS IN THE CEC’S
BUSINESS CASE FOR LIGHT-DUTY EV CHARGING.
In the Draft ZIP, the CEC provides an overview of the “Business Case for Light-Duty Charging,”
which includes modeled installation costs and the cost of service for public light-duty charging.
The report presents cost estimates for both Level 2 and DC fast chargers (DCFC).
Overall, VGIC finds that many of the CEC’s cost estimates are reasonable for planning purposes.
However, we offer the following high-level considerations regarding the Draft ZIP key
assumptions:
● Extending DCFC lifetimes: The Draft ZIP assumes a 10-year lifespan for Level 2
chargers but only a 7-year lifespan for DCFC. Based on discussions with VGIC members
regarding available warranties and EVSE specifications, VGIC anticipates that DCFC
equipment lifetimes will be greater than 7 years. In general, EVSE equipment lifespans
are increasing, and as the industry matures, longevity is expected to improve further. We
recommend that the CEC consider extending the assumed useful life of DCFC equipment
in its analysis.
● Increasing energy costs: VGIC urges the CEC to reevaluate its energy cost estimates,
particularly in light of rate variability and anticipated increases in electricity prices. The
Draft ZIP categorizes energy costs into fixed costs, demand charges, and volumetric
energy charges, but it is unclear how the CEC derived the specific figures used in the
11 Draft ZIP at p.36.
12 Aligning electric vehicle charging with the sun: An opportunity for daytime charging?, The Electricity Journal,
February 2025 at:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1040619025000028/pdfft?md5=188b066bae60f1e557ef1f92c04f
d4be&pid=1-s2.0-S1040619025000028-main.pdf
6

report. VGIC believes that these estimates may underestimate the actual energy costs that
many customers face and do not fully account for projected rate increases. For example,
PG&E’s Business EV High Use Rate (BEV-2) has a fixed monthly fee of $286.68 for just
150 kW of service—equivalent to only one port in the CEC’s primary inputs table.13 At a
larger site, such as a 12-port DCFC installation, peak demand charges would significantly
increase this fixed fee. Similarly, SCE customers on the EV rate for demand above 500
kW (TOU-EV-9) face a fixed monthly fee of $470.69 for 2-50 kV of service.14 While
PG&E’s BEV-2 rate has an average volumetric charge of $0.24/kWh, more closely
aligned with the CEC’s estimate, SCE’s TOU-EV-9 has a much higher average rate of
$0.31/kWh.15 Given these variations, VGIC recommends that the CEC account for
differences in electricity rates across utilities and incorporate future expected rate
increases into its cost modeling.
● Potential to include multiple ports on one power control system: The CEC should
consider scenarios in which multiple charging ports or plugs are supported by a single
circuit or power control system. This applies to both Level 2 and DCFC installations.
Such configurations can help distribute fixed hardware costs across more charging ports,
improving cost efficiency.
CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments and looks forward to collaborating
with the CEC and other stakeholders in this docket.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
Vehicle Grid Integration Council
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
13 See PG&E’s current commercial EV BEV rates here:
https://view.officeapps.live.com/op/view.aspx?src=https://www.pge.com/assets/rates/tariffs/CommlElecVehicle_Cu
rrent.xlsx
14 See SCE’s Rate Schedule TOU-EV-9. Accessible at:
https://edisonintl.sharepoint.com/:f:/t/Public/TM2/El6HQ0Elcq9Lia7wVwVniMoBlqPZDN0gthTXPa2JS_FxkQ?e=
52kWEU
15 Note: Both volumetric rates are bundled delivery and energy costs.
7