January 16, 2025
Hon. Michelle L. Phillips
Secretary
New York Public Service Commission
3 Empire State Plaza
Albany, NY 12223-1350
RE: Case 18-E-0138: Proceeding on Motion of the Commission Regarding Electric Vehicle
Supply Equipment and Infrastructure
Comments of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
on Department of Public Service Staff Modified Proposal for Streamlined V1G Queue
Management in Electric Vehicle Make-Ready Program and Other Programs
Introduction
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC) is a 501(c)6 membership-based advocacy
group committed to advancing the role of electric vehicles (EV) and vehicle-grid integration (VGI)
through policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to a
decarbonized transportation and electric sector by ensuring the value from EV deployments and
flexible EV charging and discharging is recognized and compensated to achieve a more reliable,
affordable, and efficient electric grid.
As New York seeks to meet its ambitious climate and clean energy goals, resolving
interconnection challenges for unidirectional EV charging infrastructure will be critical to enabling
widespread EV adoption. The updated queue management proposal provides an important
opportunity to address persistent barriers and align interconnection processes with the rapid
deployment of EV infrastructure needed to support the state’s decarbonization objectives. The
current approach to processing utility customer requests for new or upgraded service is not well
1

suited for the pace and scale of transportation electrification. One reason for this is because of the
common utility practice to treat EVs as continuous loads, adding up nameplate ratings of all EV
supply equipment (“EVSE”) on site, and then size the grid connection to that total plus 25%,
regardless of the customer’s ability to manage load across EVSE (or install on-site generation
and/or energy storage). While progress has been made to change this practice on the generation
side using flexible generator/storage interconnection concepts, few efforts have focused on flexible
service connection.
VGIC understands that New York utilities do allow flexible service connection on an ad
hoc basis, with site-specific conversations occurring between utilities and site developers to design
multi-charger sites that may lead to safely oversubscribing electrical connection in one-off
demonstrations. Additionally, New York’s Load Management Technology Incentive Program
(“LMTIP”) directly supports the deployment of technology that could be operationalized to
support flexible service connections.1 Critically, there exists a lack of clarity among stakeholders
on next procedural steps to standardize this offering, or even where to address these topics (e.g.,
EV Interconnection and Infrastructure Working Group (“EVIIWG”), Interconnection Technical
Working Group, Grid of the Future proceeding, EV make-ready dockets, etc.). VGIC believes the
primary gap that needs to be addressed is the lack of a scalable approach that provides certainty to
customers, site developers, and technology providers. Such an approach would likely include the
design elements recommended throughout these comments.
1 Joint Utilities of New York. Load Management Technology Incentive Program.
https://jointutilitiesofny.org/ev/lmtip
2

VGIC’s comments are informed by its engagement in the EVIIWG, including the
discussion resulting from its December 2024 presentation,2 its joint comments with the
Environmental Defense Fund (“EDF”) and Interstate Renewable Energy Council (“IREC”)
submitted to the EVIIWG administrators on December 10, 2024,3 and a range of leading reports
and pilot studies on flexible interconnection and advanced planning practices to facilitate
widespread EV service connection.
VGIC below offers the following recommended improvements to the modified queue
management proposal in order to establish a scalable flexible service connection framework for
EV charging facilities:
• Establish Two Flexible Service Connection Options.
• Improve Data Portals and Overall Transparency to Support Flexible Service
Connections.
• Detail the Customer Engagement Process for Flexible Service Connections.
• Establish Robust Data Reporting Requirements.
2 New York Department of Public Service. Electric Vehicle Infrastructure & Interconnection Working
Group Meeting. December 13, 2024. Slides 4-14.
https://dps.ny.gov/system/files/documents/2024/12/eviiwg-december-13-2024-slides.pdf
3 EDF, IREC, VGIC. Informal Comments on Updated Queue Management Straw Proposal. December 10,
2024. https://www.vgicouncil.org/s/2024-12-10_Joint-EDF-IREC-VGIC-EVIIWG-Comments.pdf
3

A. VGIC Recommends the Queue Management Proposal Be Modified to Formally
Establish Two Flexible Service Connection Options.
VGIC commends the Commission for establishing the LMTIP, which directly incentivizes
equipment that can enable flexible service connection.4 While this funding supports the underlying
technology deployment, a scalable process for enabling flexible service connections has not yet
been adopted by the Commission. To that end, VGIC recommends the Commission consider
flexible service connection through four distinct focus areas: (1) grid data access and enabling
tools, including grid capacity maps and the development of dynamic operating envelopes or
limited load profiles, (2) process and customer engagement, (3) technical requirements and
relevant standards for enabling technologies, including power control systems, co-located or
integrated energy storage, and linear generators, and (4) connection timelines data collection and
reporting to understand deployment progress, as partially detailed herein. Items (1), (2), and (4)
are detailed in Sections B, C, and D below, whereas item (3) is largely addressed through the
existing LMTIP and, as a result, VGIC will not address it in these comments. VGIC details below
the intended outcome of such a holistic process: the types of flexible service connection.
i. Static Import Limits/Schedules: VGIC recommends the Commission modify the EV
queue management proposal to establish clear pathways for the use of static load limits,
including both single-value import limits and multi-value import schedules (e.g., static
seasonal peak/off-peak values), allowing EV charging stations that would trigger
upstream upgrades the opportunity to begin operations sooner. This aligns with best
4 Joint Utilities of New York. Load Management Technology Incentive Program.
https://jointutilitiesofny.org/ev/lmtip
4

practices detailed in the Advanced Energy United’s EV Ready Grid Guidebook5, the
U.S. Department of Energy’s (“U.S. DOE”) Flexible DER & EV Connections report
from July 2024,6 and the recent Idaho National Laboratory (“INL”) and Pacific
Northwest National Laboratory (“PNNL”) study on “Approaches for Simplifying and
Accelerating Timelines to Processing EV Charging Load Requests.7 These limits can
be implemented as firm limits (i.e., strict service limit) or non-firm limits (i.e., penalties
for exceeding the limit).
ii. Dynamic Import Limits/Schedules: VGIC recommends the Commission modify the
EV queue management proposal to implement dynamic operating envelopes, which
allow EV charging stations to operate flexibly within capacity constraints that vary
based on real-time grid conditions. This approach, successfully demonstrated in
PG&E’s Flexible Service Connection Pilot8 and supported by the U.S. DOE’s Flexible
DER & EV Connections report from July 2024,9 enables more efficient utilization of
grid capacity and expedites interconnection timelines.
5 Advanced Energy United. EV Ready Grid Guidebook. September 23, 2024.
https://blog.advancedenergyunited.org/reports/evready
6 U.S. Department of Energy. Flexible DER & EV Connections. July 2024.
https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2024-08/Flexible DER EV Connections July 2024.pdf
7 Anand, Dhananjay et al. Idaho National Laboratory. Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. EV
Charging Infrastructure Energization: An Overview of Approaches for Simplifying and Accelerating
Timelines to Processing EV Charging Load Service Requests. January 6, 2025.
https://inldigitallibrary.inl.gov/sites/sti/sti/Sort_151131.pdf
8 Pacific Gas and Electric Company. PG&E Flex Connect Pilot.
https://www.pge.com/assets/pge/docs/clean-energy/electric-vehicles/flexible-service-connection-pilot-
overview.pdf
9 U.S. Department of Energy. Flexible DER & EV Connections. July 2024.
https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2024-08/Flexible DER EV Connections July 2024.pdf
5

B. VGIC Recommends the Commission Modify the Queue Management Proposal to
Improve Data Portals and Overall Transparency to Support Flexible Service
Connections.
To facilitate not only the siting of EV charging facilities but also the election and design
of flexible service connection, VGIC recommends the Commission direct utilities to maintain and
improve data portals with feeder- and substation-level hosting capacity maps, enabling developers
to assess grid constraints and opportunities proactively. The recent INL/PNNL study underscores
the value of such tools in reducing interconnection delays and uncertainties.10 Given the
Commission has not yet adopted a scalable framework for flexible service connection, it is not yet
determined whether flexible service connection opportunities will be presented to the customer by
the utility (i.e., following utility assessment indicating an exceptionally lengthy energization
timeline), or whether flexible service connections will originate from customer requests (i.e.,
following customer/vendor assessment of system capacity through the utilities’ Hosting Capacity
maps). In either case, VGIC sees benefit in maintaining and improving the utilities’ Hosting
Capacity maps to a reasonable degree of accuracy and update frequency.
Additionally, the Commission should direct the utilities to provide reasonably frequent and
detailed updates to stakeholders on interconnection queue statuses, estimated timelines, and
identified constraints. This recommendation echoes VGIC’s December 2024 presentation, which
emphasized the importance of transparency for developers and other stakeholders. This is critical
to guide policy development. In other words, understanding where certain bottlenecks exist and
10 Anand, Dhananjay et al. Idaho National Laboratory. Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. EV
Charging Infrastructure Energization: An Overview of Approaches for Simplifying and Accelerating
Timelines to Processing EV Charging Load Service Requests. January 6, 2025.
https://inldigitallibrary.inl.gov/sites/sti/sti/Sort_151131.pdf
6

how they differ across customer types, charger size, and locations, will help the Commission and
interested parties improve flexible service connection policy moving forward, in recognition that
any flexible service connection process or framework adopted by the Commission would be the
first of its kind.
C. VGIC Recommends the Commission Modify the Queue Management Proposal to
Detail the Customer Engagement Process for Flexible Service Connections.
For utility customer engagement, VGIC considers the following process options to enable
customer engagement:
i. Develop tools for customer-led election of flexible service connection, including:
a. Proactive customer marketing, education and outreach by the utility
b. Hosting Capacity maps as enablement tool
c. Utility pre-load assessment, on request
d. Option for customer election in load request
ii. Develop tools for utility-led deployment:
a. Filter applied to all load requests to find candidate sites. E.g., the filter can be a
certain number of days estimated for energization.
VGIC recommends the Commission seek feedback on these different tools, either through the
EVIIWG Interconnection Technical Working Group, any of the open EV make-ready proceedings,
and/or the Grid of the Future proceeding. At a minimum, VGIC recommends that customers
receiving exceptionally lengthy energization timeline estimates should be offered
information from their utility on flexible service connection options. The definition of
7

“exceptionally lengthy” should be discussed in one of the above-noted Commission proceedings
or working groups.
Additionally, VGIC recommends the Commission direct utilities to notify customers when
a timeline will not be met or is at risk of not being met. The notification should include the category
of delay, the reason for the delay, the new expected deadline, and, if applicable, flexible service
connection options. Additionally, for customers that may have pending or missed deadlines in their
energization or interconnection project requests, VGIC recommends the Commission direct
utilities to ensure customers whose projects will be or are currently at risk of experiencing
exceptionally lengthy energization timelines are provided with alternative options to proceed,
including flexible service connections.
Regardless of whether the process is initiated by utilities or customers, VGIC strongly
recommends that certain in-flight site design changes be permitted. While fundamental site design
specifications, like charge port count, may not be modifiable without re-starting the process, other
site design specifications that do not require re-setting the queue process should be permitted.
VGIC recommends the Commission address which specifications can and cannot be changed
through an active proceeding or working group, such as those listed above. Allowing these system
design changes during the review and overall energization process will be critical to streamlining
electrification and grid connection. Customers should also be provided with as much information
as feasible to design their projects before submitting energization and interconnection requests.
Ultimately, if a utility’s assessment of a customer service request (i.e., energization or
interconnection) results in an exceptionally lengthy timeline, customers should be given the
following options to proceed:
8

(1) wait for necessary upgrades to be completed
(2) withdraw customer request and re-design site (i.e., they go “back to the drawing board”)
or forego electrification project altogether
(3) elect flexible service connection option(s) based on site characteristics
D. VGIC Recommends the Queue Management Proposal Be Modified to Establish Data
Reporting Requirements Related to Flexible Service Connection.
VGIC recommends the Commission modify the Queue Management Proposal to direct
utilities to track and publish the characteristics and project milestone dates for each new and
upgraded electrical service request. This data is critical to understanding the impacts that flexible
service connection policy, rules, and regulations has on deployments. This reporting should
include:
i. Anonymized project identification information.
ii. Request type (i.e., new or upgrade) and size (kW).
iii. Days lapsed since the initial request.
iv. Whether flexible service connection was:
a. Proposed by the utility (i.e., following utility assessment indicating an
exceptionally lengthy energization timeline)
b. Accepted by the customer (i.e., following utility recommendation)
OR:
c. Proposed by the customer (i.e., following customer/vendor assessment of
system capacity through the utilities’ Hosting Capacity maps)
d. Accepted by the utility (i.e., following customer request).
9

v. If applicable based on reporting of data point (iv) above:
a. the type of the accepted flexible service connection (i.e., static or dynamic)
b. the type of flexible service connection technology in use (e.g., which defined in
the Load Management Technology Incentive Program11).
This data will be critical to developing a common, objective, and data-backed
understanding of progress against New York’s goal for streamlined queue management of
interconnection requests and new and upgraded electrical load requests. Moreover, this
information can help identify precisely where common bottlenecks persist and how severe they
are based on site size to ensure future policy development and investments are reasonable and
prudent.
Lastly, VGIC recommends the Commission leverage this data by creating formal
mechanisms to solicit and incorporate stakeholder feedback into ongoing interconnection process
improvements. Transparent engagement with this data and the relevant parties will ensure that the
interconnection framework remains responsive to evolving needs and challenges.
Conclusion
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments and looks forward to
continuing working with the Commission, Staff, the Joint Utilities, and other stakeholders to
ensure the success of New York’s transportation electrification efforts.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
11 Joint Utilities of New York. Load Management Technology Incentive Program.
https://jointutilitiesofny.org/ev/lmtip
10

Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: January 16, 2025
11