BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 21-06-017
Modernize the Electric Grid for a High (Filed June 24, 2021)
Distributed Energy Resources Future.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE DRAFT
ELECTRIFICATION IMPACT STUDY PART 2 REPORTS
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
1401 21st St., Suite 5409
Sacramento, California 95811
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
Grace Pratt
Caliber Strategies
801 K Street, Suite 2800
Sacramento, CA 95814
Telephone: (818) 264-6437
Email: grace@caliberstrat.com
Date: December 15, 2025

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 21-06-017
Modernize the Electric Grid for a High (Filed June 24, 2021)
Distributed Energy Resources Future.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE DRAFT
ELECTRIFICATION IMPACT STUDY PART 2 REPORTS
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) hereby submits
these comments on the Draft Part 2 Electrification Impact Study Reports pursuant to Decision 24-
10-030, Decision Adopting Improvements to Distribution Planning and Project Execution
Process, Distribution Resource Planning Data Portals, and Integration Capacity Analysis Maps
issued October 23, 2024, and Administrative Law Judge Jack Chang’s email sent Monday,
December 8, 2025 clarifying the deadline for comments.
I. INTRODUCTION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to comment on the Draft Part 2 Electrification Impact
Studies (“EIS Part 2”). The Draft EIS part 2 provides important evidence demonstrating how
electrification can benefit ratepayers. For example, Pacific Gas and Electric (“PG&E”) notes in its
EIS Part 2 that “Electrification growth may provide downward pressure on distribution rates by as
much as 25% by 2040.”1 The Public Advocates Office at the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Cal Advocates”) also recently released their Distribution Grid Electrification
Model 2025 Findings, which also show that electrification can decrease rates 0.2 to 4.5 cents per
1 PG&E Draft EIS Part 2 at p.13.
2

kWh by 2040.2 With California’s continued ratepayer pressures and climate goals, the state should
continue to invest in electrification, especially electrification of the transportation sector which is
California’s largest source of greenhouse gas emissions.
The Draft EIS Part 2 also highlights the important role of electric vehicle (“EV”) demand
flexibility and vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”) to deliver substantial cost savings to ratepayers
while supporting California’s electrification and reliability goals. In particular, the utilities’
analyses show that EV-enabled load flexibility is a major driver of avoided distribution system
upgrades and system-wide cost reductions. VGIC therefore provides the following comments on
the draft studies:
• California is providing concrete evidence of the value of vehicle-grid integration
investments.
• SCE and SDG&E should include added VGI and bidirectional EVs in their enhanced
demand flexibility scenarios to align with PG&E’s approach.
II. CALIFORNIA IS PROVIDING CONCRETE EVIDENCE OF THE VALUE OF
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION INVESTMENTS.
In the draft studies, all three IOUs showed significant cost savings from leveraging VGI
demand flexibility strategies. The utilities outline the following cost savings from demand
flexibility:
• Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E): $1.8B3
• Southern California Edison (SCE): $1.38B4
2 Cal Advocates, Distribution Grid Electrification Model 2025 at p.15. Available at:
https://www.publicadvocates.cpuc.ca.gov/press-room/reports-and-analyses/distribution-grid-electrification-model-
2025
3 PG&E Draft EIS Part 2 at p.15.
4 SCE Draft EIS Part 2 at p.5.
3

• San Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E): $689 million5
While the IOUs demand flexibility scenarios included load flexibility from different technologies,
including heat pumps and home batteries, EVs were a particularly large source of load flexibility.
PG&E specifically shows that EVs provide two thirds of all load flexibility in their Enhanced
Demand Flexibility scenario. 6
Additionally, outside of the EIS Part 2 studies, Cal Advocates released their Distribution
Grid Electrification Model 2025 report that further emphasizes the benefits of leveraging EVs as
a load flexibility tool. Cal Advocates finds that shifting EV charging to manage load on
distribution circuits can provide between $5 billion and $18 billion dollars in cost savings by
2040.7
All of these studies show that there is significant value from VGI strategies and investments
in California. The Commission should leverage this work to begin developing additional programs,
rates, market improvements, and other policies to remove barriers to large-scale implementation
and, in turn, unlock the immense flexibility sitting latent in California’s EVs. VGIC commends
the Commission and the IOUs for beginning to explore EV load flexibility through dynamic rate
pilots, managed charging pilots, and emergency demand response programs. However, the
Commission must look toward expanding these programs beyond pilot scale and to create
additional ways for customers to provide this value so that distribution grid upgrades can be
avoided and costs can be managed. Critically, customers currently lack certainty for VGI
5 SDG&E Draft EIS Part 2 at p.1.
6 PG&E Draft EIS Part 2 at p.32.
7 Cal Advocates, Distribution Grid Electrification Model 2025 at p.83. Available at:
https://www.publicadvocates.cpuc.ca.gov/press-room/reports-and-analyses/distribution-grid-electrification-model-
2025
4

opportunities, as all existing VGI pilots are on track to end in 2026 or, in the case of the Emergency
Load Reduction Program, Subgroup A.5 (“EV/VGI Aggregations”), 2027.
III. SCE AND SDG&E SHOULD INCLUDE ADDITIONAL VGI AND
BIDIRECTIONAL EVS IN THEIR ENHANCED DEMAND FLEXIBILITY
SCENARIOS TO ALIGN WITH PG&E’S APPROACH.
In its EIS Part 2 draft study, PG&E conducted analysis looking at an orchestrated enhanced
demand flexibility scenario and incorporated key VGI tools that the other IOUs should also look
at in their EIS Part 2 studies. In PG&E’s study, the utility modeled the following elements of VGI,
yielding significant amounts of peak load reduction by 2040:
• Active EV Charging Management & Dynamic Prices (1,007 MW by 2040):
o PG&E’s Enhanced Demand Flexibility scenario incorporates higher participation
in dynamic rates to shift peak load to off-peak times.
o PG&E also modeled what is called “active charging demand management”, where
EV charging is managed to smooth charging across off-peak times and reduce
“timer peaks” that would otherwise occur under pure time-of-use price signals,
where charging surges as soon as the off-peak period starts. These types of active
managed charging programs are already being piloted by PG&E in its EV Charge
Manager pilot. Active charging management helps reduce load on distribution
equipment in particular, which PG&E notes is key to unlocking ratepayer savings.8
• Bidirectional EVs or V2G (859 MW by 2040): PG&E also modeled energy from
bidirectional EVs that export back to the grid. This helps to provide local energy and takes
advantage of the large batteries that customers have already purchased for transportation
8 PG&E Draft EIS Part 2 at p.16.
5

use cases. In the EIS Part 2, PG&E still makes conservative assumptions about the
penetration of bidirectional vehicles and chargers, with heavy-duty vehicles (e.g., school
buses) assumed to have the highest bidirectional charging system penetration at 25% of
chargers.9 Light-duty residential chargers are assumed to have a 6% bidirectional charging
system penetration.10 Currently, nearly all major automakers have announced bidirectional
light-duty EV models and there is increasing availability of bidirectional charging systems.
VGIC anticipates that a 6% bidirectional penetration for residential EV customers by 2040
is very conservative, and we look forward to further refinements to these assumptions as
additional data on bidirectional charging system adoption becomes available.
The use of EVs for load flexibility in these two ways contributes two thirds of the added load
flexibility modeled during the coincident peak in the enhanced demand flex scenario.11
Although not as extensively investigated as PG&E, SCE and SDG&E did model some
elements of active managed charging. SCE states that their demand flexibility scenario includes a
“Flexible charging rate” that would “control when EVs start charging to flatten the charging pattern
at night.”12 40% of customers are modeled to be on this rate, but the specific impacts of the flexible
charging rate on the total load flexibility potential are unclear. SDG&E details that active managed
charging smooths the load shape and minimizes distribution costs.13 However, like SCE, SDG&E
also does not share the specific impact of active managed charging on reducing load or costs.
VGIC recommends that SCE and SDG&E share the specific impacts of active managed
9 PG&E Draft EIS Part 2 at p.74.
10 PG&E Draft EIS Part 2 at p.74.
11 PG&E Draft EIS Part 2 at p.32.
12 SCE Draft EIS Part 2 at p.33.
13 SDG&E Draft EIS Part 2 at p.13-14.
6

charging and other EV load shaping strategies on the overall load flexibility modeled in these
EIS Part 2 studies.
Neither SCE nor SDG&E model bidirectional charging systems that serve either onsite
load or export to the grid. As shown by PG&E, bidirectional charging systems can provide
significant amounts of load reduction and unlock cost savings for ratepayers. There are also
expected to be significant amounts of bidirectional charging systems in both SCE and SDG&E
service territory, with over 7.1 million electric vehicles in the state by 2030.14 Therefore, VGIC
strongly believes that both SCE and SDG&E should include bidirectional EVs as a tool in
their EIS Part 2 studies. Given PG&E’s finding that enhanced active managed charging and
bidirectional charging systems can provide up to two thirds of incremental load flexibility, SCE’s
and SDG&E’s EIS Part 2 studies would be substantively incomplete without including similar
scenarios and degree of detail about VGI benefits.
IV. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments on the draft studies. We look
forward to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: December 15, 2025
14 California Energy Commission, Assembly Bill 2127 Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure Assessment.
7