BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
FILED
03/13/25
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Establish Rulemaking 24-01-018
04:59 PM
Energization Timelines. (Filed January 25, 2024)
R2401018
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE’S RULING CLARIFYING NEXT STEPS FOR
FLEXIBLE SERVICE CONNECTIONS, MODIFYING PHASE 2 SCHEDULE, AND
REQUESTING PARTY COMMENTS
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
1401 21st St., Suite 5409
Sacramento, California 95811
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
Grace Pratt
Caliber Strategies
801 K Street, Suite 2800
Sacramento, CA 95814
Telephone: (818) 264-6437
Email: grace@caliberstrat.com
Date: March 13, 2025

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Establish Rulemaking 24-01-018
Energization Timelines. (Filed January 25, 2024)
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE’S RULING CLARIFYING NEXT STEPS FOR
FLEXIBLE SERVICE CONNECTIONS, MODIFYING PHASE 2 SCHEDULE, AND
REQUESTING PARTY COMMENTS
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) hereby submits
these comments to the Administrative Law Judge’s Ruling Clarifying Next Steps for Flexible
Service Connections, Modifying Phase 2 Schedule, and Requesting Party Comments (“Ruling”)
filed by Administrative Law Judge (“ALJ”) Justin Regnier on February 7, 2025, Email Ruling
Correcting Error in the February 7, 2025, Administrative Law Judge’s Ruling Re: Filing Date For
Reply Comments filed by ALJ Carolyn Sisto and ALJ Justin Regnier on February 10, 2025, and
E-Mail Ruling Granting Schedule Amendment filed by ALJ Justin Regnier on February 20, 2025.
I. INTRODUCTION.
VGIC commends the Commission for moving forward with the next steps for leveraging
Flexible Service Connections (“FSCs”) in California. As discussed by VGIC in previous
comments, FSCs have the potential to greatly accelerate energization timelines to allow for partial
energization of sites and unlock significant ratepayer savings in the long term through distribution
infrastructure upgrade deferral. VGIC supports the Commission’s plans to move forward with
“how to standardize FSC in simple terms that can be implemented in the very near term to avoid
2

energization delays triggered by upstream capacity needs on the distribution system.”1 This
proceeding will discuss the implementation of static and pre-programmed Limited Load Profiles
(“LLPs”). VGIC agrees with this near-term, but we recommend the Commission also consider
some elements of flexibility that will be important for the longer-term implementation of FSCs
and Flexible Service Connection Agreements (“FSCA”). We respond to the questions outlined in
the Ruling below.
II. RULING QUESTIONS.
Pilot and Process Learnings
1. What learnings from past and ongoing large IOU FSC pilots and processes can inform the
design of LLP?
In California there are two FSC pilots that VGIC is aware of: PG&E’s Flex Connect and
SCE’s Load Control Management Systems (“LCMS”). Despite these pilots being in place for
over a year, there appears to be, to VGIC’s surprise, very limited publicly available data filed
with the Commission or available on the IOUs’ websites from which VGIC or other parties may
draw learnings. At present, this finding alone suggests a clear learning that forthcoming
Commission direction must leverage: FSC implementation progress must be reported to the
Commission and public stakeholders in a format and consistency sufficient to inform
future pilot, tariff, and/or program development. VGIC is aware of only one instance in
which PG&E and SCE were asked to provide information on the number of sites using FSC, in
response to an ALJ ruling asking, “How many EV charging sites (including capacity), that are
either operational or under development, are piloting or using a form of flexible connection
1 Ruling at 4.
3

agreement that relies on power import limiting schedules?” PG&E reported 60 customers on
static load limits and that additional customers were planned to join the dynamic pilot in 2024,
and SCE reported that 4 customers were in the LCMS pilot but that they were in discussion with
10 more customers at the time.2 However, this data is now more than 6 months old and out of
date.
VGIC strongly recommends the Commission direct the IOUs to report quarterly or
annually on the number of sites awaiting grid connection, the number of sites pursuing
FSC/FSCA, the type of FSC schedule used, the type of FSC technology used, and related details
that demonstrate the timeline for energization under an FSC path, should the customer and/or
utility choose to pursue it. VGIC reiterates its proposed template for IOU reporting on FSC,
detailed in this proceeding in its May 3, 2024 Comments of VGIC on Phase 1 Scoping Memo
Issues, and copied in the figure below.3
VGIC is disappointed that the time has come to learn from PG&E and SCE’s FSC pilots,
yet parties have limited ability to understand how those pilots have yielded benefits as the IOUs
were not required by the Commission to report out on these findings. This is out of step with the
Commission’s standard course of action for new IOU pilots, tariffs, and programs.
2 See R.21-06-017, Pacific Gas and Electric Company (U 39 E) Comments Responding to Questions Contained in
Attachment 3 to Administrative Law Judge’s Ruling Providing Two Working Group Reports and Directing
Responses to Questions on Reports at p.10,
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M535/K116/535116411.PDF; and R.21-06-017, Southern
California Edison Company’s (U 338-E) Opening Comments on Track 3 Working Group Reports at p.15,
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M535/K173/535173390.PDF.
3 R.24-01-018. Comments of VGIC on Phase 1 Scoping Memo Issues.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M531/K294/531294238.PDF
4

Through PG&E’s and SCE’s responses to the ALJ Ruling filed in R.21-06-017 on May
29, 2024, and through interviews VGIC has since conducted with IOU management and VGIC
members, VGIC has been able to learn more about the implementation strategies, even if we do
not understand the effects these strategies are having on energization timelines and distribution
system upgrade costs. Based on the July 2024 responses to the ALJ Ruling in R.21-06-017,
PG&E and SCE offer simple four- and six-value schedules to each participant based on the
customer’s needs and the potential impact at that location on the grid.4 VGIC also understands
that PG&E now offers a more dynamic approach, integrating sites into its DERMS platform and
dispatching load reduction as needed. VGIC recommends that, at a minimum, the Commission
extend the current FSC schedules (i.e., simple 4- or 6-value schedules as well as PG&E’s
optional dynamic integrated approach) to the initial LLP offerings adopted in this proceeding.
Additionally, the existing FSCA language, e.g., SCE’s Form 16-332, could serve as a rough basis
for more permanent customer agreements, although VGIC offers more detailed
recommendations in its below response to ALJ Ruling Question 12.
Notably, only PG&E and SCE offer FSC approaches. To create consistency and preempt
the anticipated growth of service requests due to transportation electrification in constrained
locations on the distribution grid, VGIC recommends the Commission direct all three large IOUs
(i.e., including SDG&E) to offer scalable FSC options. In recognition of the differences in
investments and IT capability across the three IOUs, namely that PG&E appears to have
DERMS capability to implement dynamic FSC that the other IOUs do not, VGIC recommends
4 R.21-06-017, Pacific Gas and Electric Company (U 39 E) Comments Responding to Questions Contained in
Attachment 3 to Administrative Law Judge’s Ruling Providing Two Working Group Reports and Directing
Responses to Questions on Reports at p.10,
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M535/K116/535116411.PDF; and R.21-06-017, Southern
California Edison Company’s (U 338-E) Opening Comments on Track 3 Working Group Reports at p.15,
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M535/K173/535173390.PDF
5

SDG&E use the simpler four- or six-value approach to FSC schedules. Lastly, VGIC strongly
recommends the Commission direct all three IOUs to make FSC options available to all
customers, not just large load customers. Notably, certain multi-family housing sites, smaller
workplaces and fleet depots, and residential customers could also support both faster
energization and distribution system upgrade deferral by signing an FSCA, if one were made
available to them. Considering the looming $50 billion in distribution system upgrade costs
found by the Commission’s consultant in R.21-06-017, VGIC believes offering scalable FSC
options to all customers represents a no-regrets path forward to help mitigate this overwhelming
potential ratepayer cost.5
2. Are there FSC processes in other jurisdictions whose learnings should be considered? If
so, what are those jurisdictions and the associated learnings?
Based on VGIC’s engagements in New York, Massachusetts, Colorado, Michigan,
Illinois, Texas, and Maryland, we understand that all large IOU FSC processes outside of
California are entirely ad-hoc and, generally, poorly defined. In other words, we are not aware of
any standardized, scalable processes in the US that California can look to for learnings. The
conventional approach to exploring flexibility within a new or upgraded service request relies on
informal information exchange between the site developer and utility, and the content,
frequency, and platform for that information exchanged is not standardized, but dependent on
conversations between individuals at each organization. This approach does not scale well as it is
resource intensive and, for site developers, represents a significant source of uncertainty.
5 Kevala prepared for CPUC. Electrification Impacts Study Part I: Bottom-Up Load Forecasting and System-Level
Electrification Impacts Cost Estimates. May 9, 2023. https://cdn.prod.website-
files.com/62a236e9692c48cff36898da/6462917ab8a790b6b85f5fbb_CPUC%20Kevala%20EIS%20Part%201.pdf
6

While it has not defined a scalable process, New York has authorized approximately $25
million in funding specifically targeted to support the deployment of power control systems
(“PCS”) and related technologies needed to enable FSC. The New York utilities currently
administer this Load Technology Management Incentive Program (“LMTIP”), clearly detailing
eligible PCS technologies and required standards.6 VGIC recommends the Commission consider
a similar incentive approach to share the system cost savings of FSC between ratepayers and
participating customers that incur PCS installation and maintenance costs. We provide additional
detail on this recommendation below in response to ALJ Ruling Question 14.
Utilities elsewhere in the world do offer standardized, scalable FSC processes. Lessons
learned and technical details can be found in the US DOE’s July 2024 Flexible DER & EV
Connections.7 In Australia, the focus has been on dynamic operating envelopes for DERs, in
which smart inverter functions have provided value through the use of ADMS and DERMS
platforms. In the context of the Ruling’s questions regarding FSC, this is of limited use given not
all sites seeking FSC will have smart inverters.
3. What is an appropriate temporal granularity for LLP schedules? For example, will the
simple monthly or seasonal import-limit granularity utilized within Limited Generation
Profiles (LGP) be sufficient for LLP schedules? If not, why not?
VGIC suggests providing a handful of different LLP options with different levels of
temporal granularity, including:
A. 4- or 6-value structure offered in SCE and PG&E’s current FSC pilots.
6 See Load Management Technology Incentive Program Overview: https://jointutilitiesofny.org/ev/lmtip
7 US DOE. Flexible DER & EV Connections. July 2024. https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2024-
08/Flexible%20DER%20%20EV%20Connections%20July%202024.pdf
7

B. 288-value schedules based on the Limited Generation Profiles (“LGP”)
schedules authorized in R.17-07-007.
C. More granular and dynamic schedules as also offered in PG&E’s Flex
Connect pilot.
At this early stage, it is unclear whether there is one optimal LLP granularity level, and there are
important tradeoffs to consider. Additional granularity can provide more value to certain
customers, especially if meaningful import constraints are isolated to only a few hours of the day
in a few months. At the same time, more complex LLP schedules can be harder to understand
and implement for certain customers, e.g., shared heavy-duty truck charging sites. VGIC
recommends the Commission leverage a combination of the current FSC pilot schedules and the
work done to develop the LGPs to ensure there are several options offered to customers,
considering the needs of customers are incredibly diverse. This avoids “reinventing the wheel”
and instead leverages existing methodologies in support of achieving faster Commission
approval, IOU implementation, and market response. VGIC proposes the Commission
ultimately direct IOUs offer all three of the above approaches as options for customers to
choose from.
Since all utilities offer 24-value LGPs under Rule 21, VGIC anticipates 24-value LLPs to
be relatively easy to implement across all three IOUs. PG&E already offers both 4-value static
and dynamic approaches under its Flex Connect, and SCE already offers a 6-value static
schedule.8 This methodology is worth considering going forward given its simplicity and ease of
8 R.21-06-017, Pacific Gas and Electric Company (U 39 E) Comments Responding to Questions Contained in
Attachment 3 to Administrative Law Judge’s Ruling Providing Two Working Group Reports and Directing
Responses to Questions on Reports at p.10,
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M535/K116/535116411.PDF; and R.21-06-017, Southern
California Edison Company’s (U 338-E) Opening Comments on Track 3 Working Group Reports at p.15,
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M535/K173/535173390.PDF
8

understanding for customers. Meanwhile, more granular LLP schedules, such as the 24-value or
fully dynamic approaches, would provide additional import ability. For many circuits that only
face constraints in shorter and/or fewer periods across the day or year, more granular schedules
will allow customers to maximize their import ability during times where there are no
constraints. For example, PG&E has shown an illustrative example of a customer energization
where a constraint was found only during 3 months during 3-11PM. In this case, PG&E would
be able to fully serve load for ~90% of hours during the year and only need to put a constraint on
the other 10% of hours.9 If this customer were only able to choose a 4-value LLP with equal
seasons and peak periods, they would need to constrain their imports for 25% of the year. For
this reason, VGIC strongly urges the Commission to adopt more than one optional
schedule structure.
If standard LLP schedules are adopted, VGIC encourages the Commission to adopt options
for more granular 24-value LLP configurations. A good starting point for creating these more
granular configurations is to consider the schedules developed for the LGPs. These are:
• 24-Hourly: One value for each hour of the day across all 12 months
• Block: One value for each pairing of a seasonal block and an hourly block. Divides the
year into four blocks of 3-month intervals and each day into six blocks of 4-hour
intervals.
• 18-23-Fixed: One value for each of two different block intervals each day: 6pm-12am
and 12am-6pm, uniquely for each month of the year.
9 R.23-12-008. Vehicle-Grid Integration Forum Workshop Report Filed by Southern California Edison Company (U
338-E), San Diego Gas & Electric Company (U 902 E), and Pacific Gas and Electric Company (U 39 E).
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M532/K262/532262533.PDF
9

o Note: The 18-23-fixed schedule is well suited to accommodate exports and was
shown to maximize power output from LGP projects while minimizing thermal
violations. However, most exporting resources are solar projects that provide
significant exports during the day and no exports at night. This specific
configuration may or may not be the most optimal schedule for electric imports.
Additional analysis would be helpful to confirm which specific two-block
schedule is expected to be the most utilized in an LLP construct. However, VGIC
does support the overall structure of this configuration: two-time block intervals
that are unique for each month.
A menu of different options for customers will provide the IOUs and customers with
flexibility to consider which options are best for their expected load profiles and the unique
constraints and considerations for their specific circuit.
VGIC also encourages the Commission to consider more granular LLP configurations,
including a 288-value configuration with a unique value for each hour in each month (12 months
x 24 hours). Significant value can be unlocked from maximizing the import potential throughout
the year, especially if LLPs are used for a prolonged period or as a permanent energization
configuration. There were discussions on LGPs about these complex configurations but raised
issues around the potential for safety violations. It is unclear to VGIC if these same safety
concerns for granular schedules exist on the load side. If significant safety concerns exist for the
adoption of a 288-value schedule currently, VGIC suggests adopting a menu of simpler options
at this stage and revisiting the issue as more data is gathered on customers usage of LLPs and as
more complex FSC structures are adopted in the High DER proceeding.
10

4. What elements of LGP adopted in R.17-07-007 and LGP Resolutions should be adapted
for development of LLPs? In what ways can implementation of LLP employ approaches
from the LGP process? In what ways should LLP design and implementation differ from
LGP?
The Commission should leverage as many learnings from the LGPs as possible, given the
extensive amount of work conducted by stakeholders in the development of those profiles. VGIC
is strongly supportive of the schedule to adopt LLPs and near-term FSCs put forward by the
Commission in this Ruling that includes a Proposed Decision being issued in Q3 of 2025.
Adoption of widespread FSC by the Commission is needed now to address the existing and
worsening energization backlogs. At the same time, this means that we cannot repeat the more
than 5-year-long process it took to finalize the LGPs in the Rule 21 proceeding.
VGIC believes that the LGP structures should be considered as jumping off points. For
example, the Commission should consider moving forward with 24-value structures, as these
were found to be optimal for the LGPs.
5. How can Load ICA results and data inform and enable LLPs? Is there another existing
means to inform and enable LLP other than Load ICA?
VGIC believes that the Load ICA should be improved and leveraged to develop and enable
LLPs, especially as this option becomes more widespread. Currently, it is VGIC’s understanding
that IOUs utilize their own internal data that is not included in the ICA to develop the LLPs utilized
in today’s FSC pilots. This is a feasible method when there are only a few customers participating
in a pilot program. However, it will likely become much more time intensive and difficult to
conduct these studies as the number of energization requests triggering upgrades increases and as
FSCs become more popular. Leveraging a granular load ICA to develop an LLP will be critical to
11

the widespread adoption of FSCs and will help customers understand their own FSC options
without having to add work to utility staff. Ultimately, as was adopted for the LGPs for the
generation hosting capacity maps, the Commission and utilities should work towards creating the
functionality for customers to develop LLPs in the load ICA.
However, there are some baseline errors and constrained functionality that prevent LLPs
from being able to be developed from the current version of the Load ICA maps. PG&E is currently
implementing workflows to use the Load ICA maps in internal energization processes to identify
if an energization application will face capacity constraints.10 However, the other utilities’ ICA
maps are not currently reliable enough to be utilized in the same manner, with the Commission
noting “SCE’s participation in this activity [(utilizing the ICA maps for internal energization
screenings)] would need to be delayed until they improve the accuracy of their ICA results but
[Commission staff] suggest SCE should begin planning for the work.”11 SCE has stated that they
would not be able to incorporate the Load ICA into energization screening processes until at least
Q3 2026.12 Until these fundamental issues of ICA accuracy are addressed, customers will not be
able to develop meaningful LLPs utilizing these tools. When LLPs are adopted in this proceeding,
the Commission should direct the IOUs to ensure Load ICA accuracy and granularity as quickly
as possible, e.g. in Q1 2026.
Equipment Requirements and Certification
6. To implement static LLPs what device(s) are required for customers to install to control
load and prevent power consumption (i.e., imports) from exceeding the scheduled LLP? Is
PCS sufficient for this task?
10 D.24-10-030 at p.174.
11 Ibid at p.175.
12 See SCE Advice Letter 5445-E.
12

Yes, based on VGIC’s understanding, PCS is sufficient to prevent imports from exceeding
LLP limits.
7. Is a PCS certified to UL 3141 Issue 2,4 sufficient to operationalize static LLPs? If no, why
not, and are there alternative existing standards or equipment the Commission should
consider for LLP participation?
VGIC believes that utilizing PCS certified to the UL 3141 is sufficient to operationalize
static LLPs. The second edition of UL 3141 published in October 2024 includes parameters for
scheduling Power Import Limits.
8. When do stakeholders expect UL 3141 Issue 2 certified equipment to be readily available
to support LLP?
As VGIC understands it, technology providers are working toward UL 3141 Issue 2
certification, although the exact timeline is unclear at present. Given the fast-changing dynamics
in this space, VGIC encourages the Commission and Energy Division staff to meet with individual
stakeholders to confirm timelines ahead of issuing its proposed decision to establish equipment
requirements.
9. Is there a size threshold (e.g., absolute [MW] or relative [percent of total feeder rating]
site capacity) that necessitates equipment commissioning or telemetry? If so, what is that
threshold and what need does it raise?
VGIC understands the desire to ensure that there are safe operations under the LLPs, but
we caution against telemetry requirements for static (i.e., “set-and-forget”) LLP implementation.
Telemetry equipment, especially utility-grade telemetry, can be extremely expensive and add
significant complexity to a project. Particularly for situations in which FSCs with static, “set-and-
13

forget” LLPs are being used as a bridge solution for only a few months or years, telemetry should
not be required. Some level of communication capability is needed for dynamic LLPs or FSCs that
are currently being implemented by PG&E in the Flex Connect Pilot, and communications
equipment requirements have already been outlined by PG&E. VGIC recommends that these
requirements for dynamic FSCs adopted as near-term bridging solutions continue to be discussed
with the utilities on an individual basis. VGIC believes that issues surrounding standardizing
possible telemetry needs for active communication or more complex non-firm FSCs should be
taken up in Track 3 of the High DER proceeding, where long-term FSCs and non-firm capacity is
being discussed.
Energization Queue and Circumstances for LLP
10. Under what circumstances should a customer be eligible for FSCAs? What type or class
of customer should be eligible for FSCAs and why? Should FSCAs be reserved for when a
circuit is constrained? Should customers be able to elect to engage in an FSCAs on an
unconstrained circuit to aid in creating circuit capacity for additional customers?
VGIC will focus on FSCAs for EV customers, which we believe should be eligible for any
FSCA structure or program the Commission adopts. Fundamentally, VGIC believes that all EV
customers should be eligible for FSCAs, especially in the long-term, but that FSC participation
should always be voluntary. There are significant ratepayer benefits to having customers
voluntarily engage in FSCAs, even in unconstrained circuits where election of FSCAs can aid in
creating circuit capacity for additional customers in the future. VGIC discusses this in more detail
in response to the Ruling on FSCs in the High DER proceeding (R.21-06-017). However, there
aren’t many incentives for customers to voluntarily agree to an FSC given current rules. At this
time, the Commission should focus its FSC design efforts on customers that are likely to adopt
14

FSCAs today, which are customers on constrained circuits, however, the Commission should not
necessarily preclude customers on unconstrained circuits from electing FSCAs.
There are two incentives that push customers towards adopting FSCs: the potential to
energize more quickly and the potential to save money. If there are no constraints on a circuit,
customers are unlikely to save significant amounts of time or money by entering an FSCA. Under
Rule 15 and 16, customers are exposed to some elements of the costs they are creating on the grid
if upgrades exceed their allowances. However, for many EV customers leveraging Rule 29/45,
additional costs are covered. Rule 29/45 has been critical to EV adoption, especially in the
medium- and heavy-duty sectors that require significantly more power but also provide some of
the greatest greenhouse gas and air quality benefits by electrifying. If customers had to pay their
full upgrade costs, it would be detrimental to transportation electrification. However, because of
this, EV customers are more likely to be driven to adopt FSCs in order to accelerate their
energization timelines, as opposed to electing FSC for cost reasons.
This does not necessarily affect customer eligibility for FSCAs, but VGIC does believe that
this should impact marketing and education for FSCAs, as well as active outreach by the utilities
on FSC options. During the 2024 VGI Forum, hosted pursuant to D.22-11-040, VGIC outlined
three potential pathways for customers to enter into an FSCA: a customer-led path, a utility-led
reactive path, and a utility-led proactive path. See details on these pathways below, as filed in
R.23-12-00813:
13 R.23-12-008. Vehicle-Grid Integration Forum Workshop Report Filed by Southern California Edison Company
(U 338-E), San Diego Gas & Electric Company (U 902 E), and Pacific Gas and Electric Company (U 39 E). May
21, 2024. https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M532/K262/532262533.PDF
15

For the utility-led pathways, EV customers that will face long energization timelines will
likely be most interested in FSCAs. Therefore, utilities that receive EV energization applications
should react accordingly to provide FSC options if they can help a customer achieve a shorter
timeline. Utilities should also consider how to proactively outreach to customers on constrained or
nearly constrained circuits they know will electrify their fleets to share these FSC options with
them.
11. How should the Utilities address multiple requests for FSCAs on the same circuit?
At this stage, it is still unclear which way to handle multiple FSCAs on the same circuit is
best for ratepayers and FSC participants. VGIC understands that SCE is currently only allowing
one customer on a given circuit to participate in its LCMS pilot. Under the current LCMS pilot,
the customer that engages in the FSCA is allocated all available firm headroom on that circuit
while the distribution upgrade is being constructed, so if another customer requests to energize
new load on that circuit, there is no extra capacity until the upgrade is completed. Since SCE
reactively selects LCMS participants from its energization queue, VGIC believes it is not currently
possible for two FSC energization applications on the same constrained circuit to have to share
16

capacity in any way. As FSC becomes a scalable, standardized offering, it is unclear how common
this will become. At this time, moving forward with a “first-come, first-serve” structure for
bridging solutions is likely most feasible to implement. Here, VGIC reiterates its
recommendation for clear reporting requirements of existing and forthcoming FSC efforts,
so the Commission can devise an effective capacity allocation methodology based on real data
provided by the IOUs.
If more permanent FSC structures are adopted with non-firm capacity allocations, then the
Commission should consider schedules for reassessment or other frameworks for allocating
capacity between multiple customers. VGIC is aware of discussions regarding a “use it or lose it”
approach for firm or non-firm import or export capacity, where customers that are not utilizing
their full capacity reservations have that capacity reallocated to other customers. VGIC looks
forward to considering these frameworks for long-term FSC implementation in Track 3 of the High
DER proceeding. For the focus of this proceeding, i.e., static LLPs solely utilized as bridging
solutions, these frameworks are likely too complex for immediate implementation.
Tariffs, Rules, Agreements, and Forms
12. What are the applicable tariffs, rules, agreements, and forms that may need
modification? What should those modifications be? Is there a need for differences between
different IOUs’ versions of these documents? If so, what is this need based upon?
In order to implement FSCs, an FSC agreement (FSCA) will need to be developed for
customers to sign. This will outline the FSC schedule and terms they are agreeing to and will also
ensure that customers have installed the necessary PCS or other equipment to adhere to the LLP.
SCE’s Form 16-332 for the LCMS pilot provides an example of what this type of agreement could
look like. However, there are some parameters of SCE’s existing Form 16-332 which greatly risks
17

a positive customer experience, including the ability to change LCMS parameters at any time with
customers needing to adhere to new limits within 24 hours or less.14 A permanent framework
should include more specificity around whether and how the IOUs can change firm import limits
and should consider better protections for customers. Without these customer protections, VGIC
is concerned over participant backlash and limitations on FSC election, jeopardizing both
energization timelines and the opportunities for ratepayer cost relief through distribution upgrade
deferral.
Modifications to IOU energization rules are also needed for implementation of LLPs. For
example, SCE’s Rule 16 and Rule 29 currently note the following: “Installation of automated load
management software pursuant to the LCMS Pilot and passive, non-electrically connected
monitoring devices on or near the meter by non-SCE personnel is permitted.”15 This reference to
automated load management and specific LCMS pilot would likely need to be changed to
“Installation of power control systems.” In PG&E’s Rule 2, there are references that a customer’s
connected load will be deemed as “the sum of the rated capacities of all of the Customer's electric
utilization equipment that is served through one metering point and that may be operated at the
same time.”16 This may also need to be modified to acknowledge the use of power control systems
and/or the election to electrify less than the sum of the rated capacities during certain hours, as
agreed upon within the FSCA.
The Commission should also implement changes to energization rules that allow for flexibility
in the FSC structures that could be adopted in the future. The High DER proceeding (R.21-06-
017) is considering the long-term implementation of FSCs that could include more flexible
14 SCE Advice Letter 5138-E.
15 SCE Rule 16 and Rule 29 at 12. Service Connections.
16 PG&E Rule 2 at H.1. Connected Load Ratings.
18

structures and non-firm capacity. Any language for energization rules that is adopted in response
to the ALJ Ruling in this Energization Timelines proceeding (R.24-01-018) should be flexible
enough to allow for elements such as more granular LLP schedules or non-firm capacity
agreements and constructs that may emerge from the High DER Proceeding (R.21-06-017).
13. Are there any unique considerations that must be included in modifications to rules,
agreements, and/or forms (e.g., such as for onsite generation, electric vehicles, or emergency
conditions)?
The Commission should consider how to combine FSCs with Rule 21 and onsite generation
and energy storage. VGIC anticipates that EV customers will explore meeting their charging needs
during constrained hours by installing onsite DERs. This can allow for additional load to be served
without requiring grid imports. PCS at the point of common coupling can ensure that import and
export limits are not exceeded, but any parameters around having both load and generation behind-
the-meter will need to be specified.
14. Are there other steps needed to implement FSCs? If so, what are these steps?
VGIC reiterates that successful, sustainable, and scalable implementation of FSC depends
on the Commission’s ability to track the outcomes of FSC. As such, VGIC urges the Commission
to adopt IOU reporting requirements. VGIC acknowledges that both IOUs and the Commission
have limited resources and that reporting requirements can be viewed as an undue burden or added
“red tape.” However, considering both nascency of scalable FSC frameworks globally and the
criticality of FSC for California’s electrification efforts, this is one domain in which public data
reporting will be immensely informative for further policy development by the Commission.
Lastly, VGIC notes that customers electing FSC in response to grid constraints are enabling
the deferral of costly distribution upgrades. Due to the fact that these costs are largely socialized
19

among all ratepayers, for example under Rule 29/45, and considering the time value of money that
underpins the distribution upgrade deferral value proposition, VGIC notes that customers with
FSCAs will materially reduce system costs compared to a non-FSC approach. While ratepayers
should be entitled to the majority of those avoided system costs, the customer electing the FSC
will incur upfront and/or ongoing costs by installing and maintaining an eligible PCS. Depending
on the PCS, this may include costly hardware like gateways, relays, and/or stationary energy
storage as well as software solutions, which may be paid for monthly or annually. With these costs
and benefits in mind, VGIC respectfully urges the Commission to adopt a “shared savings” model
in which FSC customers receive a share of the distribution system upgrade deferral value. In New
York, the Public Service Commission has authorized approximately $25 million in funding
specifically targeted to support the deployment of technologies that underpin FSC. The New York
utilities currently implement this Load Technology Management Incentive Program, detailing
eligible PCS technologies and required standards.17 VGIC recommends the Commission adopt a
similar technology incentive program to offset the customer costs of electing FSC and
installing/maintaining PCS to unlock greater anticipated ratepayer benefits of (a) accelerated
electrification and (b) distribution upgrade deferral. Given the affordability crisis and Governor
Newsom’s Executive Order N-5-24, the total costs of this incentive program should not outweigh
the ratepayer benefit from scaling FSC.
III. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments on the Ruling. We look
forward to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
17 See Load Management Technology Incentive Program Overview: https://jointutilitiesofny.org/ev/lmtip
20

Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: March 13, 2025
21