BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION OF
THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Application of Pacific Gas and Electric Company Application 20-10-011
(U39M) for Approval of its Proposal for a Day-Ahead (Filed October 23, 2020)
Real Time Rate and Pilot to Evaluate Customer
Understanding and Supporting Technology.
RESPONSE OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL TO PACIFIC GAS
AND ELECTRIC’S PETITION FOR MODIFICATION OF D. 21-11-017
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
1401 21st St., Suite 5409
Sacramento, California 95811
(279) 895-7855
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
Grace Pratt
Caliber Strategies
801 K Street, Suite 2800
Sacramento, CA 95814
(818) 264-6437
grace@caliberstrat.com
March 7, 2025
1

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION OF
THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Application of Pacific Gas and Electric Company Application 20-10-011
(U39M) for Approval of its Proposal for a Day-Ahead (Filed October 23, 2020)
Real Time Rate and Pilot to Evaluate Customer
Understanding and Supporting Technology.
RESPONSE OF THE VEHICLE GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL TO PACIFIC GAS
AND ELECTRIC’S PETITION FOR MODIFICATION OF D. 21-11-017
Pursuant to Rule 16.4(f) of the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public
Utilities Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) responds
to Pacific Gas and Electric’s (“PG&E”) Petition for Modification of D.21-11-017, filed on
February 5, 2025.
I. INTRODUCTION.
VGIC is disappointed by PG&E’s Petition for Modification (“PFM”) to terminate
implementation efforts of its Day-Ahead Hourly Real-Time Pricing Business Electric Vehicle
(“DAHRTP-BEV”) rate and associated export compensation pilot for non-Net Energy Metering
(“NEM”) customers. In its below response, VGIC details an alternative path forward in recognition
of the concerns raised by PG&E and the present landscape of dynamic and export rate
opportunities available to commercial electric vehicle (“EV”) charging customers that aim to
support the grid and lower their total cost of ownership.
The final DAHRTP-BEV rate represents groundbreaking progress in the landscape of real-
time pricing (“RTP”) rates and commercial electric vehicle (“EV”) managed charging. DAHRTP-
BEV was approved not as merely another pilot, as initially proposed by PG&E. Instead, the
Commission unanimously and decisively directed PG&E to implement DAHRTP-BEV as a full-
2

scale optional real-time pricing (“RTP”) rate, the first of its kind in the nation. When approved,
D.21-11-017 and the associated D.22-10-024 sent a powerful, unwavering signal to customers and
solution providers seeking opportunities to manage commercial EV charging load and implement
vehicle-to-grid (“V2G”) export: California is committed to unlocking the benefits of this
technology. Acting on this regulatory certainty and finality, commercial EV charging site hosts,
EV fleets, project developers and financing entities, and technology providers mobilized in
preparation for the anticipated October 2023 launch of DAHRTP-BEV and the associated non-
NEM export pilot. In the months and years that followed, PG&E unexpectedly delayed
implementation first by six months, then by a year, and then by two years, and has now filed the
PFM to request approval to terminate implementation efforts entirely. Meanwhile, California
ratepayers are in dire need of cost relief and the grid demands new sources of low-cost load
flexibility to support reliability during emergencies. With a majority of EV charging use cases
characterized by long dwell times that bring inherent load flexibility and the potential for power
export, VGIC views ending DAHRTP-BEV and the associated export pilot before it begins as a
significant misalignment between the needs of California ratepayers and the opportunity presented
by the fast growing network of connected, flexible commercial EV charging sites. DAHRTP-BEV
exists within an increasingly small set of strategies that customers and EV service providers
(“EVSP”) can use in California to unlock net peak load reductions and alleviate distribution system
constraints, and, in turn, mitigate further upward pressure on rates.
Approving the PFM as filed would eliminate the benefits of DAHRTP-BEV and the
associated export pilot without parties having had the chance to collect evidence to understand the
scale of these benefits. Furthermore, approving the PFM would also severely undermine the
3

regulatory certainty typically broadcast from Commission decisions and inhibit market
development for emerging solutions that can yield substantial net benefit for California ratepayers.
With this in mind, VGIC acknowledges that several of the implementation challenges
PG&E cites in its PFM do present barriers to launching DAHRTP-BEV and the associated export
pilot as envisioned. In its below response, VGIC offers a reasonable, no-regrets path forward that
we believe achieves a compromise between PG&E’s cited concerns over implementing DAHRTP-
BEV as directed, the existing ratepayer cost pressures top of mind for customers, the Public
Advocate’s Office, and the Commission, and the imperative to support the growth of a robust, self-
sustaining managed and integrated EV charging market that yields net benefits for all parties
involved. Specifically, VGIC offers the following comments in response to PG&E’s PFM:
• The Commission should deny the PFM as filed because the requested relief is
insufficiently supported by the record in the proceeding or other matters officially
noticed.
o The PFM erroneously asserts Commission direction on RTP rates.
o The PFM would result in discriminatory treatment toward certain customers.
o The PFM contains unsupported claims regarding the prioritization of billing
system updates.
o The PFM violates Commission Rules by seeking to modify two Commission
decisions through a single PFM.
o The PFM misrepresents the state of PG&E’s Vehicle-Grid Integration (“VGI”)
Pilots.
o The PFM misrepresents BEV Parties’ positions.
• The Commission should deny the PFM as filed because the requested relief undermines
the Commission’s objectives and principles and would materially harm PG&E
ratepayers.
o The PFM would materially harm customers and solution providers working to
unlock load flexibility and exports to support California’s grid.
o The Commission has staked the future of load flexibility and distributed exports
on a single strategy, CalFUSE, for which available data suggests there is little
customer and vendor interest and limited load shift results.
4

o Over-relying on a single approach is at odds with established energy planning
principles of resource diversity and supplier diversity, strategies intended to
mitigate risk.
o Approving the PFM would send a strong signal that regulated utilities can
successfully delay and then terminate implementation efforts for Commission
orders they do not wish to comply with.
• VGIC proposes Alternative Proposed Modifications for the Commission’s consideration.
o The Commission should direct PG&E to leverage its already completed work on
dynamic distribution components to promote compliance with the California
Energy Commission’s Load Management Standard.
o The Commission should direct PG&E to enable shadow billing for initial
DAHRTP-BEV implementation.
o The Commission should authorize budget transfer within the already approved
DAHRTP-BEV funds to support the Alternative Proposed Modifications.
II. THE COMMISSION SHOULD DENY THE PFM AS FILED BECAUSE THE
REQUESTED RELIEF IS INSUFFICIENTLY SUPPORTED BY THE
RECORD IN THE PROCEEDING OR OTHER MATTERS OFFICIALLY
NOTICED.
a. The PFM erroneously asserts Commission direction on RTP rates.
In the PFM, PG&E asserts that “the rate structure authorized in D.21-11-017
has become outdated in that it does not meet the current guidance in the Energy
Division CalFUSE guidance framework (CalFUSE or CalFUSE framework)…”1
VGIC disagrees that this offers support for the requested relief as the Energy Division’s
CalFUSE framework is not equivalent to Commission direction. Notably, the
Commission has not directed PG&E to adopt the CalFUSE framework for business EV
(“BEV”) customers. In fact, the only Commission guidance on this matter is found in
D.24-01-032, in which the Commission denies PG&E’s request to implement the
CalFUSE framework for BEV customers, an occurrence detailed by PG&E in the
1 PFM at 2.
5

PFM.2 VGIC believes the PFM conflates Energy Division guidance with Commission
direction and, as a result, the Commission should disregard the use of the CalFUSE
framework’s existence as evidence to support the PFM’s request.
b. The PFM would result in discriminatory treatment toward certain customers.
The PFM critically fails to consider the impacts that terminating DAHRTP-
BEV implementation and the associated non-NEM export pilot would have on certain
BEV customers. While PG&E notes that both bidirectional and unidirectional charging
BEV customers are currently eligible to participate in PG&E’s VGI RTP rate
implemented through its vehicle-to-everything (“V2X”) Pilots, these pilots have
several restrictions that differentiate the opportunity from DAHRTP-BEV and the
associated non-NEM export pilot. First, the V2X Pilots are operating under budget
limitations, including for program administration and equipment rebates, which will
likely mean the V2X Pilot will, at some point, come to an end. Specifically, PG&E’s
website notes there are only incentives remaining for 126 chargers.3 Second, PG&E’s
V2X Pilots restricts the customer pool by imposing an additional requirement for
customers: they must participate through a PG&E-approved Automated Service
Provider (“ASP”). In contrast, DAHRTP-BEV does not require enrollment through a
PG&E-approved ASP. Third, for bidirectional charging customers, only customers
with equipment listed on the “Eligible Product List for the V2X Commercial Pilot”
may participate in the V2X Pilot. PG&E’s website notes there are only three eligible
vehicles and four eligible chargers for the V2X Commercial Pilot.4 Meanwhile, VGIC
2 PFM at 13-14.
3 PG&E. Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) pilot program. https://www.pge.com/en/clean-energy/electric-
vehicles/getting-started-with-electric-vehicles/vehicle-to-everything-v2x-pilot-programs.html. (Accessed March 7,
2025).
4 Ibid.
6

notes that all school buses sold in California under the California Air Resources
Board’s (“CARB”) Hybrid and Zero-Emission Truck and Bus Voucher Incentive
Project (“HVIP”) or Zero-Emission School Bus and Infrastructure (“ZESBI”)
programs must be capable of bidirectional charging.5 As for available chargers, VGIC
notes that other manufacturers, including Fermata Energy, InCharge, Heliox, Ford
Motor Company, GM Energy, Tesla, dcbel, and Wallbox offer bidirectional capable
charging equipment that can interconnect under Rule 21 or via non-Rule 21 temporary
interconnection pilots.6 While some of these chargers are currently marketed toward
residential customers, VGIC anticipates a share of residential chargers may soon be
used to support light-duty fleet V2G.
These three restrictions results in discriminatory treatment toward BEV
customers that do not wish to participate in the VGI RTP over concerns that the pilot
may soon exhaust authorized funds or the inability to procure equipment eligible for
the V2X Pilots. VGIC recommends the Commission consider the impacts the PFM
would have on these customers.
c. The PFM contains unsupported claims regarding the prioritization of billing
system updates.
The PFM details that one of the three developments that have taken place since
the Commission approved the DAHRTP-BEV rate as follows:
“delays in PG&E’s billing system upgrade are preventing PG&E from
implementing DAHRTP BEV in the new Billing Cloud Service (BCS)
system when it launches, without causing further delays in the
5 See CARB. Implementation Manual for the Hybrid and Zero-Emission Truck and Bus Voucher Incentive Project.
https://californiahvip.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/FY23-24-HVIP-Implementation-Manual-103124.pdf.
October 31, 2024; CARB Implementation Manual Appendix G: Zero Emission School Bus & Infrastructure
Incentives. https://californiahvip.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/04/Final-FY23-24-ZESBI-Implementation-
Manual.pdf. April 30, 2024.
6 A.24-03-019. Direct Testimony of Zach Woogen on Behalf of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council. January 8.
2025. Pages 6-10. https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/SupDoc/A2403019/7930/553184229.pdf
7

implementation of other rates that the Commission has approved that
PG&E believes are of higher priority than DAHRTP BEV.”7
Furthermore, the Deceleration of Emily Bartman notes that the Net Billing Tariff
(NBT) and the Residential Income Graduated Fixed Charge “have a much greater
potential to impact affordability, as NBT will reduce cost-shift and the residential fixed
charge will reduce bills for low income customers.”8 The Declaration
includes a referencing detailing that NBT implementation should occur by June 2024
and Residential Fixed Charges should be implemented by March 31, 2026. These dates
were determined by Decisions authorized in December 2022 and May 2024,
respectively. In contrast, DAHRTP-BEV implementation was authorized in November
2021 and slated for October 2023 launch. This timeline predates both NBT and
Residential Fixed Charges decisions and target implementation dates.
The existing timelines suggest a “first come, first serve” approach that would
position DAHRTP-BEV for timelier implementation. Given the Commission has not
issued direction detailing the relative prioritization of these initiatives, PG&E’s
argument based on its internal assessment on the relative importance of these initiatives
should be disregarded as support for the PFM.
With that in mind, VGIC strongly urges the Commission to adopt a
prioritization to guide PG&E’s initiatives, which may be a “first come, first serve”
approach, or may be based on analysis of potential ratepayer benefit, ability to achieve
state goals, or other Commission objectives.
7 PFM at 1.
8 Declaration of Emily Bartman at 3.
8

d. The PFM violates Commission Rules by seeking to modify two Commission
decisions through a single PFM.
Through the PFM, PG&E petitions to modify not only D.21-11-017, but also
notes the following:
“Because the non-NEM export compensation pilot authorized by D.22-
10-024 is dependent on the underlying DAHRTP BEV rate authorized
by D.21-11-017, eliminating the DAHRTP BEV rate would also moot
the non-NEM export pilot.”9
VGIC appreciates PG&E’s acknowledgement that modification of D.21-11-017 would
materially impact the Commission direction adopted in D.22-10-024, making the latter
“moot.” Section VIII of the PFM reiterates that “With the elimination of DAHRTP
BEV as an optional rate, the export compensation pilot authorized by D.22-10-024
would become moot and could not be implemented, as that pilot depends on the
DAHRTP BEV rate.”10 Notably, Commission Rule 16.4(a) details that “A petition for
modification asks the Commission to make changes to an issued decision” (emphasis
added).11 PG&E does not cite authorities or precedent to support its request to modify
two Commission decisions, one explicitly and one implicitly, through a single PFM.
The Commission should make an appropriate determination on the PFM considering
this potential violation of Commission Rule 16.4(a).
Additionally, since D.22-10-024 was issued in October 2022 and the PFM was
filed on February 5, 2025, PG&E has failed to comply with Rule 16.4(d). Although
9 PFM at 3.
10 PFM at 26.
11 CPUC Rules of Practice and Procedure. Rule 16.4(a). https://www.cpuc.ca.gov/-/media/cpuc-
website/divisions/administrative-law-judge-division/documents/rules-of-practice-and-procedure-may-2021.pdf
9

PG&E offers justification for filing the PFM more than one year after the effective date
of D.21-11-017, it does not provide this justification in reference to D.22-10-024.
e. The PFM misrepresents the state of PG&E’s Vehicle-Grid Integration (“VGI”)
Pilots.
PG&E argues that Phase 2 of the VGI Pilots offers an adequate near-term
alternative to DAHRTP-BEV implementation for both unidirectional and bidirectional
charging customers. However, as detailed above in section II.b., the PFM critically fails
to note that the V2X Pilots are operating under budget limitations, including for
program administration and equipment rebates, which will likely mean the V2X Pilot
will, at some point soon, come to an end. Specifically, PG&E’s website notes there are
only incentives remaining for 126 chargers.12 Given the mounting ratepayer
affordability crisis (i.e., 47% residential electricity rate increase from 2019 through
202313) and Executive Order N-5-24 on the rate crisis,14 directing the Commission to
do everything in its power to address it, VGIC acknowledges and accepts the high
likelihood that PG&E’s V2X Pilots will not receive additional funding beyond what
has already been authorized. With this in mind, while the V2X Pilots provide an
existing pathway for BEV customer participation in RTP, VGIC believes PG&E has
misrepresented the reliability and sustainability of this interim solution and, as such,
the argument that V2X Pilots provides an adequate alternative for DAHRTP-BEV
should be disregarded by the Commission.
12 PG&E. Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) pilot program. https://www.pge.com/en/clean-energy/electric-
vehicles/getting-started-with-electric-vehicles/vehicle-to-everything-v2x-pilot-programs.html. (Accessed March 7,
2025).
13 Legislative Analyst’s Office. Assessing California’s Climate Policies – Residential Electricity Rates in California.
January 7, 2025. https://lao.ca.gov/Publications/Report/4950
14 Governor Gavin Newsom. Executive Order N-5-24. October 30, 2024. https://www.gov.ca.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2024/10/energy-EO-10-30-24.pdf
10

f. The PFM misrepresents BEV Parties’ positions.
VGIC commends PG&E and the other BEV parties for the consistently
constructive and good faith collaboration that has underpinned D.21-11-017, D.22-10-
024, and the proactive engagement since Q4 2023 as detailed in Declaration of Oriana
Tell. All relevant parties have engaged in creative problem solving and sought
customer-centric solutions in the face of ever-changing dynamics and challenges. That
said, to ensure a factually correct record, VGIC notes that PG&E’s claim that “The
BEV parties, however, reserved their positions,” in reference to the required relief
discussed in 2024.15 VGIC shared its position on the potential PFM relief request in a
detailed response circulated to BEV parties on October 17, 2024. The position
document is included as Attachment B at the bottom of this response.
III. THE COMMISSION SHOULD DENY THE PFM AS FILED BECAUSE THE
REQUESTED RELIEF UNDERMINES THE COMMISSION’S OBJECTIVES
AND PRINCIPLES AND WOULD MATERIALLY HARM PG&E
RATEPAYERS.
a. The PFM would materially harm customers and solution providers working
to unlock load flexibility and exports to support California’s grid.
Approving the PFM as filed would limit opportunities for prospective
customers to the VGI RTP rate implemented through PG&E’s V2X Pilot. As detailed
above in section II.b., this restricts the customer pool by imposing an additional
requirement for customers that do not wish to participate through a PG&E-approved
ASP. Additionally, for bidirectional charging customers, only customers with
equipment listed on the “Eligible Product List for the V2X Commercial Pilot” may
participate in the V2X Pilot, despite the availability of several additional vehicles and
chargers that are currently capable of offering bidirectional charging services.
15 PFM at 12. See also Declaration of Oriana Tiell, paragraph 13.
11

Additionally, as detailed immediately below, the PFM would effectively limit
opportunities for dynamic load flexibility and V2G export to the CalFUSE framework,
which faces critical headwinds including (1) the fundamental rate design and (2) the
immense education gap for both solution providers and customers.
b. The Commission has staked the future of load flexibility and distributed
exports on a single strategy, CalFUSE, for which available data suggests there
is little customer and vendor interest and limited load shift results.
To be clear, VGIC supports the CalFUSE framework. It offers a hybrid
dynamic pricing and demand response approach that has the potential to unlock load
flexibility from certain customers and technologies. However, VGIC is concerned over
the Commission’s overreliance on the CalFUSE framework as the only strategy for
unlocking load flexibility and V2G exports. VGIC notes two anecdotal data points that
challenge CalFUSE’s ability to reach all available customers interested in providing
demand flexibility and/or V2G exports, and we cite two other data points that further
highlights the design challenges inherent to the current CalFUSE framework.
First, the presence of the subscription component severely mutes the volatility of
the real-time grid conditions, which fundamentally challenges the prospect of
responding to real-time grid conditions. In practice, the subscription component,
“frontloads” much of the value of participation into the first year of participation,
especially for new V2G customers that are demonstrating combined load reduction and
exports that far exceed the average EV customer baseline that would be applied. In the
following years, the opportunity to save money is much smaller due to the presence of
the baseline. In contrast, the DAHRTP BEV approach provides consistent opportunities
to optimize charging and, for non-NEM export pilot participants, discharging around
real-time grid conditions.
12

Second, the CalFUSE framework, in large part due to the subscription component
and its scaling factors, presents an education gap for third-party providers and
customers alike. VGIC makes no assertions that CalFUSE is too complex for all
customers and vendors to understand, and we believe such an assertion would be
paternalistic and would underestimate the intelligence of these individuals. However,
we are concerned that the pace of the customer journey and the limited amount of time
customers spend thinking about electricity is fundamentally at odds with the lengthy,
complicated explanations required to explain the CalFUSE framework, including the
exceptionally complex subscription component and its scaling factors.
VGIC notes that PG&E’s VGI RTP has 65 customers (SAIDs) enrolled as of
December 1, 2024.16 PG&E does not disclose what share of these customers are
residential or BEV, nor do they disclose what share are bidirectional (and receiving
additional rebates to participate through the V2X Pilot upfront rebates) or
unidirectional. If we were to assume all 65 VGI RTP customers are BEV customers,
and consider that PG&E has 937 total BEV customers, the enrollment rate is just under
7%. Considering very few commercial EV charging stations are non-networked, and
that customers “can’t lose” due to the V2X Pilots offering only credits for performance
and no penalties if customers perform worse than the OAT, VGIC believes this
enrollment rate is very far below its potential.
Additionally, VGIC notes that initial data from Southern California Edison’s
(“SCE”) CalFUSE Dynamic Rate Pilot, the only CalFUSE implementation open to EV
customers that has completed robust evaluation, indicate that the structure has yet to
16 Declaration of Oriana Tiell at paragraph 14.
13

create significant load shifting. SCE’s recent final evaluation report notes that in the
pilot, “the majority of the customers (14 out of 22) did not show evidence of a lower
peak usage share,” and any peak load reduction that was achieved was likely due to
external factors.17 This is very likely in part due to the subscription charges, which
limits customers’ exposure to the real-time prices. For customers that already have
relatively low energy consumption baselines, there weren’t many opportunities to
capture meaningful bill savings. During high priced hours and days, customers did not
face high real-time prices unless they consumed more than their subscription amount.
Taken together, this evidence suggests that the CalFUSE framework, though
promising, is not well suited for all customers as it can fall apart due to a lack of
education opportunities, the limited value due to the subscription component, and the
apparent limits on resulting load shift, as suggested in the third-party analysis
conducted on SCE’s Dynamic Rate Pilot. DAHRTP BEV provides a meaningful
alternative to CalFUSE and allows customers, PG&E, and all stakeholders to learn
about how customers respond to more exposure to RTP signals. By being exposed to
more meaningful price signals, DAHRTP customers will be further incentivized to shift
their load and export to lower priced hours or days, and VGIC anticipates that more
significant load shifting and power export is likely under this structure. This is
especially true for commercial BEV customers that face very high electricity costs for
their EV charging, as these customers are more likely to be working with third party
solution providers, which may include PG&E-approved ASPs but may include other
sophisticated algorithm-based technologies, that are working to optimize BEV
17 SCE. Final Evaluation Report for Southern California Edison’s Dynamic Rate Pilot. Circulated February 28,
2025 to service lists of R.20-11-003 and R.22-07-005.
14

charging using software tools. If these customers are able to better capture bill savings
and avoid high prices, they will be more inclined to take that option.
It is also important that the Commission pursue a wide variety of load shifting
strategies for EVs at this time because charging needs are so diverse, especially for
non-residential customers. These customers will have very different power needs for
their EVSE, from less than 50 kW to over 1,000 kW, and different charging schedules,
with some vehicle remaining parked for significant amounts of time while others need
fast charging to be able to continue driving along a route. Given the considerable
diversity of charging needs across consumers, it will be most beneficial for customers
to be given a wide range of charging schedules, rates, and tools to manage charging to
find what best fits their specific needs and internal cost-benefit calculations. Offering
a variety of options can enhance public acceptability and feasibility by tailoring
approaches to the diverse needs of customers and stakeholders. DAHRTP is an
important option to pursue as part of that flexibility.
c. Over-relying on a single approach is at odds with established energy planning
principles of resource diversity and supplier diversity, strategies intended to
mitigate risk.
Offering both CalFUSE and DAHRTP BEV options to customers is consistent
with California’s well-established approach to resource diversity and supplier diversity.
Just as the Commission orders and authorizes the utilities to construct or contract with
a range of centralized electric generation resources, including onshore and offshore
wind, utility-scale solar, and utility-scale energy storage, the Commission must
promote resource diversity in its distributed energy resources. Similarly, just as utilities
rely on a range of suppliers for its service vehicles, equipment, and technology
15

providers, utilities must promote supplier diversity as it sources demand side flexibility
and distributed energy resource exports. These diversification strategies mitigate risk
and, especially in a challenging business environment for startups and emerging
technologies, provides protections against any individual actors exercising market
power and resilience against solution providers going out of business, leaving behind
stranded assets.
Additionally, the over-reliance on CalFUSE carries a risk of “path dependence”
– the influence of past decisions on future outcomes, hindering the implementation of
alternative solutions. In the case of VGI customers, VGIC is concerned that relying too
heavily on a single dynamic rate approach for all customers, as PG&E implies in its
PFM to be the CalFUSE framework, would lock in a specific future that may not, in
fact, be in the best interest of ratepayers. Notably, Cal Advocates has published findings
suggesting that optimized VGI implementation can reduce electrification-driven
distribution system costs from the Commission’s estimated $50 billion through 2035
down to $22.7 billion.18 Given the magnitude of these numbers, the stakes are
incredibly high, especially for low-income and other vulnerable California ratepayers
already feeling an outsized energy cost burden. However, to achieve the reductions
modeled by Cal Advocates, IOUs will need to engage EV customers at a significant
enough scale for these optimized load shapes to have a beneficial impact on the total
required distribution system upgrades. VGIC is concerned that pursuing only the
CalFUSE framework, risks a gamble with path dependence, wherein PG&E would be
18 See CPUC Electrification Impacts Study Part 1:
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M508/K423/508423247.PDF and Cal Advocates DGEM 2.0
Preliminary Results, October 21, 2024. https://www.publicadvocates.cpuc.ca.gov/-/media/cal-advocates-
website/files/press-room/reports-and-analyses/241024-public-advocates-office-dgem-20-preliminary-results.pdf
16

“locked in” to offering only CalFUSE RTP rates, with no opportunity to understand
EV customer interest in the DAHRTP BEV rate design until it is too late to avoid the
upgrades forecasted by 2035 and the resulting ratepayer costs of up to $50 billion.
d. Approving the PFM would send a strong signal that regulated utilities can
successfully delay and then terminate implementation efforts for Commission
orders they do not wish to comply with.
As detailed in section I above, PG&E had planned to launch DAHRTP in
October 2023 and later received approval for several extension request. The PFM
details PG&E’s assessment that they would be unable to implement DAHRTP until the
completion of billing system upgrades in 2029. VGIC is concerned over the signal that
this level of delay and resulting PFM sends to regulated entities and all stakeholders
regarding other existing and future Commission orders.
If the Commission grants the PFM to cancel DAHRTP implementation, it will
send a clear signal that Commission-regulated entities can elect to effectively nullify
regulatory decisions through continued delays. Such a standard will erode confidence
in the Commission’s ability to regulate utilities effectively. Stakeholders and customers
depend on the Commission to uphold its decisions and ensure timely execution of
critical programs. This is particularly true for programs aiming to tap into emerging
technologies and unlock a broader commercial ecosystem that will provide services to
California for years and decades to come, such as the VGI market. If utilities observe
that Commission orders can be sidestepped by citing system limitations or technical
constraints, it will undermine the Commission’s credibility and deter future policy
progress. Moreover, this delay undermines the integrity of the public engagement
process. The optional DAHRTP BEV rate and associated non-NEM export pilot were
17

the results of extensive productive and good-faith stakeholder discussions, and, by
allowing PG&E to avoid implementation, stakeholders who invested time and
resources in shaping this policy will find it difficult to justify future investments in
Commission initiatives.
To maintain trust in the Commission’s decision-making process, the
Commission should deny PG&E’s PFM as filed and instead adopt the Alternative
Proposed Modifications detailed below.
IV. VGIC PROPOSES ALTERNATIVE PROPOSED MODIFICATIONS FOR THE
COMMISSION’S CONSIDERATION.
VGIC offers below three straightforward Alternative Proposed Modifications to the
DAHRTP BEV approach that addresses PG&E’s three primary reasons for
submitting the PFM. We respectfully request the Commission consider these
Alternative Proposed Modifications and offer our team as a resource to discuss each
with the Commission, Energy Division staff, PG&E, and other parties. VGIC offers
specific redlines to D.21-11-017 Ordering Paragraphs in Attachment A below its
response.
a. The Commission should direct PG&E to leverage its already completed work
on dynamic distribution components to promote compliance with the
California Energy Commission’s Load Management Standard.
PG&E notes throughout the PFM that the DAHRTP-BEV rate and
associated export compensation pilot would not comply with the CEC’s LMS due
to the absence of a dynamic distribution component. VGIC strongly recommends
PG&E include a dynamic distribution component in the DAHRTP-BEV rate and
export compensation pilot and, fortunately, PG&E has already completed the
work to develop both a dynamic distribution rate methodology and
18

communication platform. Through its Hourly Flex Pricing pilot and VGI RTP
rate pilot, PG&E currently published hourly distribution price signals based on
marginal distribution system costs for each customer’s representative circuit. With
this in mind, VGIC views a strong opportunity to simply adopt this dynamic
distribution component into DAHRTP-BEV, thereby putting PG&E in compliance
with the CEC LMS and enabling DAHRTP-BEV to represent a more complete
value stack for customers and third-party solution providers.
b. The Commission should direct PG&E to enable shadow billing for initial
DAHRTP-BEV implementation.
The PFM and associated Declarations note that PG&E explored
implementing shadow billing for DAHRTP-BEV and determined that it was not
feasible. While VGIC appreciates that implementing DAHRTP-BEV through a
shadow bill presents a challenge, we find PG&E’s argument as to why this is
infeasible to be incomplete. The Declaration of Andrew Au states the following:
“The DAHRTP BEV opt-in rate approved in D.21-11-017 cannot be shadow
billed because it can produce RTP revenues that exceed the non-RTP BEV
tariff OAT revenues. Shadow billing for the CalFUSE expanded pilots and
VGI pilot was approved as a credit only program, i.e., no additional customer
payments if their shadow RTP bill is higher than their otherwise applicable
tariff (OAT) bill.”19
VGIC does not dispute that the shadow billing approach for the CalFUSE expanded
pilots and the associated VGI pilot was approved as a credit-only program.
However, the Commission has not adopted a definition of “shadow billing” that
precludes its use outside of CalFUSE in a manner other than “credit-only,” nor has
PG&E detailed why, on a practical level, only credits can be issued through shadow
19 Declaration of Andrew Au at paragraph 6.
19

billing. With this in mind, VGIC acknowledges that shadow billing for DAHRTP-
BEV would not be identical to the shadow billing approach for CalFUSE. However,
VGIC believes PG&E holds the expertise and capability to adapt shadow billing to
be useful beyond the credit-only approach and, in turn, support DAHRTP-BEV. As
such, VGIC urges the Commission to consider directing shadow billing be used to
implement DAHRTP-BEV, albeit through a modified shadow billing methodology
from what is in place for CalFUSE pilots limited to a credit-only approach.
c. The Commission should authorize budget transfer within the already
approved DAHRTP-BEV funds to support the Alternative Proposed
Modifications.
To support the modification recommended in the above, VGIC recommends
the Commission authorize additional budget transfers within DAHRTP-BEV to
support the establishment of a modified shadow billing approach. As PG&E has
not detailed the budget amount it requires to implement shadow billing for
DAHRTP-BEV customers, VGIC recommends the Commission direct PG&E to
submit an Advice Letter to request approval for additional budget, as needed, to
support modified shadow billing for implementation or DAHRTP-BEV and the
associated export pilot.
V. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit this response to the PFM. We look forward to
further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
20

/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
March 7, 2025
21

Attachment A:
• OP 2:
o Pacific Gas and Electric Company shall develop a marginal energy cost based on
California Independent System Operator’s day-ahead pricing and average default load
aggregation point loss factor and a marginal distribution cost based on the marginal
distribution cost calculated under Pacific Gas and Electric’s Expanded Dynamic Rate
Pilot and Vehicle Grid Integration Pilots authorized in D.24-01-032 and Resolution
E-5192 for the optional day-ahead real time rate adopted in this proceeding and the
export compensation pilot authorized in D.22-10-024.
• New OP:
o Pacific Gas and Electric Company shall implement the DAHRTP rate authorized in
this Decision for commercial electric vehicle customers and the export compensation
pilot authorized in D.22-10-024 using a shadow billing approach until PG&E’s billing
system can accommodate the necessary updates to no longer require a shadow billing
approach.
• OP 12:
o Within 30 days of this issuance of this Decision, Pacific Gas and Electric Company
shall file a Tier 1 advice letter creating a Dynamic and Real-Time Pricing
Memorandum Account that includes a subaccount to specifically track costs
associated with implementing the day-ahead, real-time hourly pricing (DAHRTP) rate
authorized in this Decision for commercial electric vehicle customers. PG&E is
authorized to recover up to $6 million to implement its optional DAHRTP rate
including any costs incurred to develop and implement a shadow billing approach to
enable customer participation. If, 24 months after the issuance of this Decision, the $6
million budget cannot support additional customer enrollment in the DAHRTP rate,
PG&E may file a Tier 2 advice letter seeking authorization to recover up to an
additional $3.6 million to continue enrolling and evaluating customers’ responses to
the DAHRTP rate.
22

Attachment B:
VGIC Feedback on October DAHRTP Drafts
October 31, 2024
VGIC opposes the redlined settlement agreement and would not support the draft PFM unless modified as
recommended below.
1. PG&E’s Primary Reason for Filing the PFM, Amended Settlement, and Redlined Settlement Hinges
on DAHRTP BEV Lacking a Dynamic Distribution Price Signal, Thereby Making it “Obsolete” and
Non-Compliant with CEC LMS.
A. VGIC Proposes the PFM and Settlement be Modified to Adopt the Distribution Price
Signal Currently Implemented in VGI Pilot and Expanded Dynamic Rate Pilots.
2. PG&E’s Secondary Reason for Filing the PFM, Amended Settlement, and Redlined Settlement
Hinges on BCS Deployment Preventing DAHRTP BEV From Launching.
A. VGIC Proposes the Settlement be Redlined to Allow PG&E to “Shadow Bill” the
DAHRTP BEV Rate Until BCS Deployment is Complete.
3. PG&E’s approach critically lacks an uninterrupted solution for both BEV V1G and BEV V2G
customers. The plan to offer BEV customers (V1G and V2G) participation in HFP via the VGI Pilots
until the pilot funding expires and then offer these customers 2023 GRC II HFP rates does not square
with the timelines of these respective developments. The Commercial VGI Pilot is 74% subscribed,
which suggests that the funding may not last much longer. Given the mounting ratepayer affordability
crisis, the outcome in the most recent CPUC Resolution on the VGI Pilots (which did not fulfill
PG&E’s entire funding request), and yesterday’s Executive Order on the rate crisis, directing the
CPUC to do everything in its power to address it, settlement parties must collectively acknowledge
and accept the high likelihood that PG&E’s VGI Pilots will not receive additional funding beyond
what has already been authorized. Meanwhile, the 2023 GRC II HFP rates will not be implemented
until at least mid-2026, which PG&E acknowledges in its 2023 GRC II testimony.
A. VGIC’s singular condition since the second delay came to light in December 2023, shared
consistently and clearly during calls with settling parties throughout 2024, has been to
ensure that there is continuity and a clear path forward for participating customers despite the
BCS update delays. We have also clearly communicated that this condition can and should be
addressed via written commitment in PG&E’s Commission filings detailing this path forward
for these customers. However, the approach shared in these documents makes no effort to
address this singular condition or even reference the challenge this poses to customers. It is,
therefore, more important than ever that PG&E follow through on its settlement agreements
to implement a full-scale, optional dynamic rate and companion export compensation. VGIC
has been inspired by PG&E’s commitment to large-scale VGI ranging from Patti Pope’s
public remarks, to setting ambitious internal VGI goals, to investing in a team of highly-
23

skilled, passionate, and motivated VGI program designers and implementers that VGIC staff
and members have had the pleasure of collaborating with and learning from. VGIC has held
the honor of appearing alongside PG&E representatives in several virtual and in-person
public forums where both parties promoted PG&E’s leadership and commitment in the space.
However, in agreeing to the redlined settlement and supporting the PFM, VGIC would
directly betray its mission and we believe that PG&E, too, in taking these steps, will
inexplicably and inexcusably obstruct its own clearly-stated VGI goals.
4. Initial VGI Pilot Phase 2 Insights: Recent insights from VGI industry participants suggest that
PG&E’s VGI Pilots place a great deal of limitation on customers and, in turn, successful
implementation for BEV customers (both V1G and V2G) within the VGI Pilots structure is
increasingly unlikely:
A. HFP Rate Design: Until recently, companies were unable to properly model the HFP
approach due to the lack of a clear, published methodology or tools for customers/vendors to
calculate the distribution price signal. While PG&E provided VGIC with its estimates for an
average BEV customer on DAHRTP (generation, no distribution, no baseline) vs HFP
(generation, distribution, baseline), the recent publication of the HFP signals on the HFP
website has made clear that the rate will not financially support projects in the long-term.
▪ Specifically, the implementation of the subscription element undercuts the financial
viability of bidirectional charger and charger-paired BESS deployment. This is
because customers would effectively be “competing” against their prior year’s load
shape. In effect, the HFP subscription element has recreated the perennial baselining
issue that has limited EV participation in demand response programs for years, but
simply placed it on a different time scale (year-prior, as opposed to 10-in-10). The
subscription element severely mutes the HFP signal and, as a result, will not
meaningfully spur sustained participation and investment from ASPs. This
fundamentally puts BEV participation at risk because, having administered the VGI
Pilots, PG&E knows better than most that customer participation, especially from
bidirectional charging customers, cannot be unlocked without ASPs. Simply put,
bidirectional charging customers have no ability to discharge their vehicle
batteries without these technology partners. There is no “export now” button on a
vehicle, charger, or smartphone app, as that is fundamentally not how these products
are being designed for BEV customers or, for that matter, residential customers
driving light-duty vehicles.
▪ In contrast, the DAHRTP approach detailed in the settlement agreement and adopted
across three separate Commission orders spanning two years of record does not
incorporate this limiting subscription component and, instead, exposes participating
customers to real-time-equivalent marginal generation costs (i.e., for energy and
generation capacity). This means the volatility is not muted and, in turn, supports
more meaningful customer revenues and a viable, sustainable shared value
proposition between participants, ASPs, PG&E, and non-participating ratepayers.
B. Approved equipment and ASP/aggregator requirements: Customers participating in the
VGI Pilots must do so with PG&E-approved equipment and through an aggregator that has
an agreement with an automotive OEM. In contrast, the DAHRTP export settlement
agreement does not impose any such requirements. Of course, customer-sited generation and
energy storage equipment must comply with PG&E’s Rule 21 interconnection requirements.
24

However, the DAHRTP export settlement agreement supports an open market where
technology providers can compete based on customer service and equipment price, rather
than artificially limiting participation to owners with certain equipment participating through
certain types of ASPs/aggregators. This is evident today, where PG&E’s V2X Pilots
webpage, lists only one eligible charger and vehicle for the residential pilot, and only one EV
manufacturer and one charger manufacturer for the commercial pilot. However, VGIC is
aware of the following UL-certified bidirectional chargers that are not deemed eligible within
PG&E’s VGI Pilots:
▪ Commercial
• BorgWarner 60 kW
• BorgWarner 125 kW
• Fermata FE-15 15 kW
• Fermata FE-20 20 kW
• InCharge US 22 kW
▪ Residential
• GM Energy V2X Charger
• Tesla Wall Connector + Tesla Gateway
5. Implications of Billing System Upgrade Delays: During the settlement discussions, the billing
system updates were not refuted by any party. VGIC felt settling parties were operating under an
implicit, collective understanding that PG&E was making an informed accounting of the timeline
required to update its own billing system. PG&E, unchallenged by settling parties, significantly
underestimated its BCS update needs. VGIC sympathizes with the challenges of estimating billing
system upgrade costs and understands that the reality of billing system implementation relies on a
patchwork of suboptimal temporary fixes that, through dedicated technical expertise and innovative
problem solving, manage to meet the challenging, high-stakes task of customer billing. VGIC also
understands the inherent risks posed to non-participating customers when billing systems are being
modernized. However, PG&E must not shift the risk it accepted by estimating these billing system
updates onto customers in the form of rescinding this important VGI program opportunity. In other
words, PG&E’s unforced error must not become BEV customers’ barrier to achieving lower costs of
ownership or ratepayers’ burden of forgone avoided system costs. Fortunately, PG&E has
implemented a viable alternative for other RTP approaches, shadow billing, which should be
leveraged for BEV DARHTP customers, as well.
6. Marketing: Under the interim approach of implementing BEV RTP-equivalent pricing via the V2X
Pilots, customers are not receiving adequate education and marketing to participate in the rate.
PG&E’s “EV rate plans,” “Electric Vehicles,” and “Rate plans” webpages do not provide any
information or links to this option. PG&E’s “Hourly Flex Pricing” webpage does contain the relevant
information, however, based on VGIC’s navigation (conducted October 29, 2024), there is no
pathway for customers to reach this webpage through the three relevant webpages noted above, or
through any other means other than Google. For those seeking participation in HFP based on word of
mouth, Google may be sufficient. For those seeking participation in HFP through an Automated
Service Provider (ASP) or through PG&E’s Fleet Advisory Services Program (although PG&E has
not detailed that it is sharing information about HFP within its program), an easily accessible
webpage is not necessarily critical. However, for customers outside of ASP, word-of-mouth, and
Fleet Advisory Services, PG&E does not link to its HFP webpage from all relevant webpages (i.e.,
“EV rate plans,” “Electric Vehicles,” and “Rate plans”). This further demonstrates that practical
differences between a time- and funds-limited PG&E-administered pilot and a full-scale, optional
25

rate, which would necessarily appear in its rate webpage and tariffs book and on its “Rate plans” and
“EV rate plans” web pages alongside all other relevant EV rate plans.
7. VGIC Recommended Path Forward: VGIC recommends settling parties embrace the following
two changes to address the concerns raised in PG&E’s PFM:
A. The settlement agreement should be redlined and re-signed by settling parties to incorporate a
dynamic distribution rate component based on the same marginal cost-based methodology
implemented in PG&E’s other RTP rates (HFP and VGI Pilot HFP).
B. The settlement agreement should be redlined and re-signed by settling parties to adopt
shadow billing for BEV DAHRTP and BEV DAHRTP Non-NEM Export customers until the
billing modernization updates are complete.
26