January 7, 2025
To: Energy Division Rule 21 staff
Subject: Informal Comments of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council on 2024 Q4
Interconnection Discussion Forum Regarding “Outstanding Topics” and Forthcoming
Rule 21 Proceeding Scope
I. Introduction.
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) appreciates the opportunity to provide these
informal comments on key topics related to the interconnection of vehicle-to-grid (“V2G”)
systems and associated processes under Rule 21. Below, we outline several areas where we believe
improvements could significantly enhance the efficiency and clarity of interconnection procedures,
ultimately supporting California's ambitious clean energy and transportation goals, including
Senate Bill 676, which directs the Commission to maximize the use of feasible and cost-effective
VGI.
II. Interconnection Application Form and Portal Updates to Allow Applicants to
Indicate a Site as V2G.
To avoid confusion and delay, it is critical that each investor-owned utility’s (“IOU”)
interconnection application forms and online portal, if available, allow applicants to clearly
identify whether an energy storage system is a V2G system. This update, detailed although
ultimately not directed in Decision (D.) 20-09-035 Issue 23f, is now more relevant as V2G
interconnection requests have increased in the five years since the Working Group Three report
was submitted. Furthermore, applicants should be able to specify the technology type (V2G AC
or V2G DC), as it can expedite utility review and support the recommended reporting detailed in
section VI below.
Notably, PG&E has made and maintained this update to its forms, which demonstrates that such
updates are feasible and effective.1 In contrast, SCE and SDG&E have not implemented similar
updates, which VGIC members report resulting in confusion and delays.2 The lack of appropriate
forms also risks applications being routed out of Rule 21, for example, to a make-ready program
or tariff (i.e., Rule 29/45).
1 PG&E Electric Form No. 79-1174-03. Attachment H. Section AB.
https://www.pge.com/tariffs/assets/pdf/tariffbook/ELEC_FORMS_79-1174-03H.pdf
2 See SCE Electric Form 14-918. Question 3.b. https://www.sce.com/sites/default/files/custom-
files/PDF_Files/ELECTRIC_FORM_14-918_PDF%20fillable.pdf and SDG&E Electric Form 142-05201
https://tariffsprd.sdge.com/view/tariff/?utilId=SDGE&bookId=ELEC&tarfKey=730
1

VGIC recommends this outstanding issue be scoped into the upcoming Rule 21 proceeding.
Consistent, standardized processes are essential to enable V2G project development and avoid
unnecessary delays.
III. Incorporate UL QIKP Certification Program as One Permanent Pathway for V2G
AC Interconnection.
This item is referenced in issue #3 of List of Potentially Outstanding or Important
Interconnection Topics from Past IDFs, Proceedings, and Other Completed or Ongoing
Interconnection Discussions. VGIC recommends the upcoming Rule 21 proceeding seek to
expedite the incorporation of the UL QIKP certification program for V2G AC systems as one
available permanent interconnection pathway for V2G AC applicants. This could occur through
a dedicated track in the Rule 21 proceeding, a dedicated reconvening of the V2G AC subgroup,
or some other pathway. The UL QIKP certification pathway evaluates both the core UL 1741/UL
9741 safety requirements and the grid-interactive requirements found in UL 1741 SA and SB.
Timely incorporation into Rule 21 would immediately streamline interconnection for V2G
AC projects, which can significantly increase the availability of distributed V2G-capable
systems supporting California’s urgent ratepayer affordability, system reliability, and statewide
climate goals.
Given these recent developments, as well as the highly self-contained nature of the issue relative
to all other outstanding IDF/Rule 21 issues, VGIC strongly urges this issue be taken up in a near-
term, dedicated effort to focus party efforts and streamline the incorporation of UL QIKP, rather
than defer near-term action. Critically, action to incorporate UL QIKP pathway should not
be dependent on the completion of UL 1741 SC, which is a separate standard. VGIC sees
no reason to wait until UL 1741 SC is published to consider the UL QIKP pathway, as
these pathways are not mutually exclusive but rather complementary.
Given the experience of VGIC, UL, utilities, and other participants in the recent Maryland
docket incorporating a UL QIKP pathway for V2G AC interconnection (detailed below), we
believe it is possible to efficiently address this issue in its own effort (either a dedicated track of
the forthcoming Rule 21 proceeding, a dedicated reconvening of the V2G AC technical subgroup
that is unrelated to the completion of UL 1741 SC, or some other dedicated effort). In turn,
supporting V2G AC interconnection can unlock anywhere from 820 MWh3 (i.e., only from
currently-registered Tesla Cybertrucks in the state) to 150,000 MWhs4 (from all on-road
California EVs) of latent technical energy storage capacity. This untapped network of distributed
energy storage customers could enroll in emergency reliability programs, cost-based export rate
designs, and dynamic rate pilots which are intended to support the Commission’s critical
3 Assumes an average 123 kWh Tesla Cybertruck battery size and 6,670 total Tesla Cybertrucks registered in
California through Q3 2024. See California Energy Commission (2025). New_ZEV_Sales_Last_update_11-19-
2024_ada.xlsx. ZEV and Infrastructure Stats Data. Data last updated September 30, 2024. Retrieved January 6, 2025
from https://www.energy.ca.gov/files/zev-and-infrastructure-stats-data.
4 Assumes an average 71.4 kWh battery size and 2,113,135 EVs sold in California. See https://ev-
database.org/cheatsheet/useable-battery-capacity-electric-car and https://www.veloz.org/ev-market-report/
2

affordability, reliability, and decarbonization goals. If even a very modest 0.25% of this total
energy storage capacity from currently-registered Tesla Cybertrucks was made available for
V2G activities, it would represent an immediate 400% increase in participating V2G kWh in
California, thereby significantly supporting market development and ensuring widespread V2G
can indeed support the grid in the long run, as envisioned by Senate Bill 676 (Bradford, 2019).5
In terms of instantaneous available power, enabling the fleet of already-registered Tesla
Cybertrucks to export to California’s grid would represent 76 MW of instantaneous available
export capability.6 VGIC is concerned that the Commission may forego these significant values
and the ratepayer benefits they bring if we defer consideration of the UL QIKP pathway until UL
1741 SC is complete.
As referenced above, there has been a recent regulatory precedent related to UL 1741 QIKP.
Maryland’s Public Service Commission recently indicated its approval of UL QIKP as one of
two permanent interconnection pathway options for V2G AC systems, citing its strong technical
foundation.7 Specifically, the Commission documents note the following three reasons to offer
the UL QIKP V2G AC pathway as an alternative to the UL 1741 SC/SAE J3072 approach:
1. “A core component of UL 1741 SC is that it enables the EVSE to authorize the
EV to discharge based on the vehicle’s compliance to SAE J3072. This is
important in cases where several V2G capable vehicles may be plugging into the
EVSE, and the EVSE needs to perform this check. However, in cases where only
one V2G capable vehicle will be plugging into the EVSE (e.g., a single-family
residential setting), the UL QIKP certification pathway is sufficient to ensure grid
interconnection/performance certification. In summary, QIKP works for a single
installation site with a single defined EV.
2. While the Workgroup supports the incorporation of UL 1741 SC as an option for
V2G AC systems within these regulations, the UL 1741 SC working group has
not yet published the standard and has pushed back publication a few times.
Allowing for the QIKP pathway creates a hedge against further delays to UL 1741
SC, and enables Maryland to achieve the vision set forth in the DRIVE Act
3. Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) of V2G systems may choose different
pathways. As long as those pathways can ensure safety and reliability through UL
5 The two largest interconnected V2G sites in California are the Oakland and Cajon Valley school bus depots. The
Oakland site uses 74 141-kWh BYD/RIDE Type A buses and the Cajon Valley uses six Lion Type C, which we will
assume have the smallest battery capacity of 126 kWh. The available capacity from these sites totals 11 MWh.
Assuming a 5% availability rate, this yields 0.5 MWh of available energy storage capacity. With 820 MWh available
Tesla Cybetruck energy storage capacity at a 5% availability rate and a 5% customer participation rate, this
represents a 367% increase.
6 Assumes 11.5 kW V2G charging. https://www.tesla.com/powershare.
7 See: Maryland Public Service Commission. Notice Initiating a Rulemaking, Opportunity to Comment, and
Rulemaking Session. RM 87. https://webpscxb.psc.state.md.us/DMS/rm/rm87. Proposed Regulations (RM87):
PC44 Interconnection Workgroup: V2G Regulation Proposal. October 30, 2024. Page 5-6. See also Commission
approval of RM 87. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ojh98h_81ZA&t=410s at 5:49. Note final adoption is not
anticipated until May 1, 2025.
3

certification, including both the fire/shock safety evaluation and the grid
interconnection/performance functionality, then these pathways should be open to
OEMs. This is particularly important while the V2G system market is still
relatively nascent. We must ensure the core safety and reliability of the grid,
which both pathways accomplish, while not being too prescriptive over the path
that OEMs take.”8
Utility and industry stakeholders have been briefed on the UL QIKP pathway for V2G AC
systems, including at the December 7, 2023 Smart Inverer Working Group and subsequent
meetings, and there exists growing support for this approach.
While early bidirectional charging products were based on a V2X DC configuration, more recent
bidirectional charging solutions, including offerings from Tesla and Lucid, leverage a V2X AC
configuration. Given the prevalence and continued growth of these systems, it is reasonable to
address adoption of this pathway at this time.
Critically, adopting the UL QIKP pathway into Rule 21 via either (a) an immediate,
separate track in the forthcoming Rule 21 proceeding, (b) an immediate reconvening of the
V2G AC subgroup, or (c) some other pathway to immediately consider these revisions to
Rule 21 shall not preclude progress on other likely viable V2G AC interconnection
pathways standards, namely UL 1741 SC. Instead, it provides immediate optionality for
developers while maintaining the core, rigorous safety and interoperability certification
requirements needed to ensure safety and reliability on the grid.
With this in mind, VGIC strongly urges ED staff to consider the following scoping question for
the new Rule 21 proceeding to address these deficiencies and resolve this important outstanding
issue:
• “Should Rule 21 be updated in the immediate term, through either (a) a dedicated track of
this proceeding, (b) a dedicated effort within the V2G AC subgroup, or (c) some other
near-term approach to incorporate UL QIKP as a means of interconnecting V2G AC
systems? Why or why not?
o If so, what specific changes are needed to Rule 21 to allow this certification
pathway to be utilized?”
Additionally, should UL 1741 SC be published prior to finalizing the new Rule 21 proceeding
scope, and to ensure equitable treatment for both V2G AC standards pathways, the Commission
may seek to pose the following related question to parties:
• “Should Rule 21 be updated in the immediate term, through either (a) a dedicated track of
this proceeding, (b) a dedicated effort within the V2G AC subgroup, or (c) some other
8 Maryland Public Service Commission. Notice Initiating a Rulemaking, Opportunity to Comment, and Rulemaking
Session. RM 87. https://webpscxb.psc.state.md.us/DMS/rm/rm87. Proposed Regulations (RM87): PC44
Interconnection Workgroup: V2G Regulation Proposal. October 30, 2024. Page 5. Footnote 14.
4

near-term approach to incorporate UL 1741 SC as a means of interconnecting V2G AC
systems? Why or why not?
o If so, what specific changes are needed to Rule 21 to allow this certification
pathway to be utilized?”
IV. Reassess Application Fees for Non-NEM and Non-NBT Exporting Systems.
VGIC is concerned that interconnection fees for non-NEM and non-NBT exporting systems are
disproportionately high and not reflective of actual utility costs. This is an outstanding issue from
the previous Rule 21 proceeding R.17-07-007: “Should the Commission revise the application
fee for non-net energy metering systems? How should the Commission determine what the
revised fee should be?”9 The topic is also detailed in issue #5 of List of Potentially Outstanding
or Important Interconnection Topics from Past IDFs, Proceedings, and Other Completed or
Ongoing Interconnection Discussions.
Notably, these fees significantly exceed those charged by utilities in other states, as demonstrated
below in Attachment A. Additionally, these fees have an outsized impact on V2G systems,
which have relatively lower upfront costs compared to stationary energy storage systems, rooftop
solar PV, or other DERs interconnecting under Rule 21. For example, where the most significant
share of the total upfront costs for a stationary battery energy storage system is the battery itself,
this is not one of these costs in enabling a V2G system, as the vehicle battery has already been
purchased for its primary transportation use case. As a result, the $800 interconnection
application fee comprises one of the most significant upfront costs for V2G systems and, in turn,
one of the largest barriers to widespread V2G.
We recommend this outstanding issue from R.17-07-007 be addressed in the first phase of the
forthcoming Rule 21 proceeding to ensure the fees are reasonable for V2G customers. Reducing
these fees would remove a significant barrier for smaller V2G projects, in particular.
V. Align Rule 21 with the CEC’s DSGS Option 3.
The CEC’s Demand Side Grid Support (“DSGS”) Option 3 provides a critical revenue
opportunity for V2G resources, with potential earnings of $100/kW-summer or more. However,
the current UL 1741 SB requirement in Rule 21 prevents many V2G systems from participating,
even though the CEC explicitly states UL 1741 SB listing is not required for DSGS Option 3
Battery Virtual Power Plants.
VGIC strongly urges this issue be resolved to unlock emergency reliability resources in response
to the high-revenue V2G opportunity, as is the intention of CEC DSGS Option 3.
VI. Standardize Reporting of V2G Projects in Quarterly Rule 21 Timeline Filings.
9 Assigned Commissioner’s Second Amended Scoping Memo and Ruling for Phase II of Proceeding. May 12, 2021.
http://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M384/K265/384265152.PDF. Page 10. Issue 9.
5

This outstanding item is related to the items detailed in issue #2 on the List of Potentially
Outstanding or Important Interconnection Topics from Past IDFs, Proceedings, and Other
Completed or Ongoing Interconnection Discussions. Decision 20-09-035 OP 22 mandates
quarterly reporting on interconnection timelines, yet the lack of consistency in how V2G projects
are categorized undermines the utility of these reports and the learnings used to inform broader
program, policy, and tariff development at the CPUC.
PG&E’s reporting does include detailed classifications, such as “Storage – EV” (presumably,
V2G AC) and “Storage – EVSE” (presumably, V2G DC). This provides a model for
transparency and supports key learnings to inform the development of CPUC initiatives.
However, SCE and SDG&E quarterly timeline reporting fails to distinguish V2G technology
types within the “energy storage” category, despite evidence of V2G interconnection activity in
their territories (e.g., Cajon Valley School District in SDG&E territory). VGIC suspects that
improvements made in response to the forms/portal update issue detailed above in section II
would directly support this standardized reporting.
All IOUs should be required to uniformly categorize V2G projects in their reports. This will
enable stakeholders to identify critical bottlenecks in the interconnection process and address
them effectively, ensuring all technology types are treated equitably.
VII. Address Counterproductive Disconnect Requirements During Undervoltage Events.
This item is related to issues #3 and #7 in the List of Potentially Outstanding or Important
Interconnection Topics from Past IDFs, Proceedings, and Other Completed or Ongoing
Interconnection Discussions. As VGIC understands it, under current Rule 21 requirements,
exporting devices must disconnect during undervoltage events. This approach is
counterproductive, as it exacerbates grid instability rather than mitigating it. By staying
connected, V2G systems could support local voltage levels and enhance grid resilience.
VGIC recommends revisiting this requirement to align with grid reliability objectives and enable
V2G resources to contribute positively during undervoltage events.
VIII. Define a Timeline or Roadmap for Transitioning to Virtual Inspection and
Notification-Only Approaches.
This item is related to issues #2 in the List of Potentially Outstanding or Important
Interconnection Topics from Past IDFs, Proceedings, and Other Completed or Ongoing
Interconnection Discussions. Virtual inspections and notification-only approaches both offer cost
and time improvements over traditional site inspection processes, especially for smaller V2G
projects. Establishing a clear timeline and milestones for this transition will streamline
interconnection processes and reduce burdens on applicants.
Currently, all three utilities leverage virtual inspections to a certain extent to streamline
interconnection. However, field inspections are still required typically for projects using relays,
AC disconnects, NGOMs, and variances from Rule 21. Meanwhile, the currently-approved
6

notification-only pilot is available through September 2025, and is only open to non-export
standalone storage or solar-plus-storage projects less than 30 kVA capacity.10
VGIC acknowledges that the V2G market may not yet be mature enough to leverage these
approaches. However, we recommend the new scope of the proceeding consider establishing
certain milestones or explicit timelines for when both issues should be taken up. Presumably,
virtual inspections would be applied to V2G in the near term, whereas notification-only may be a
more mid- to long-term endeavor. VGIC advises against subjecting these issues to the organic
cycles of scoping new Rule 21 issues – as evident in Phase II of R.17-07-007, unexpected events
can lead to delays of 4-5 years, even for already scoped, time-sensitive matters. Instead, VGIC
recommends the new proceeding consider what milestones (e.g., a certain number of
deployments) or timelines (e.g., a certain date for implementation) are appropriate to implement
virtual inspection and, subsequently, notification-only approaches.
IX. Conclusion
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit these informal comments to the CPUC Energy
Division staff on outstanding or important interconnection topics. We look forward to further
collaboration with ED staff and other stakeholders on this important initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
Zach Woogen
/s/ Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
(510) 665-7811
www.vgicouncil.org
10 https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Published/G000/M528/K052/528052750.PDF
7