Restore Funding for DSGS & DEBA – Key Clean Energy Programs

June 3, 2025
Senate President pro Tempore Mike McGuire Assembly Speaker Robert Rivas
1021 O street, Suite 8518 1021 O Street, Suite 8330
Sacramento, CA 95814 Sacramento, CA 95814
Senator Scott Wiener Assemblymember Jesse Gabriel
1021 O Street, Suite 8620 1021 O Street, Suite 8230
Sacramento, CA 95814 Sacramento, CA 95814
RE: Restore Funding for Clean Energy Programs DSGS & DEBA in the 2025-26 Budget
Dear pro Tem McGuire, Speaker Rivas, Senator Wiener, and Assemblymember Gabriel,
We are writing to respectfully urge you to restore funding commitments made to the Demand
Side Grid Support (DSGS) and the Distributed Electricity Backup Assets (DEBA) programs to
the amounts in the January 2025 budget proposal. These programs are critical to California’s
efforts to manage an increasingly constrained electricity supply, reduce electricity system
costs, and reduce the state’s reliance on polluting “peaker” plants. In doing so, these
programs provide an important tool to keep the lights on and pave the way for a resilient,
affordable, and clean energy future.
We recognize the difficult fiscal environment the Legislature is navigating this year. The budget
deficit demands tough choices, and we appreciate your continued focus on protecting
California’s long-term energy and climate priorities.
That’s why it is critical to preserve investments in DSGS, a proven program that is delivering
real, clean megawatts today, and ensure DEBA can get off the ground as intended. Both
programs help solve multiple urgent problems—energy reliability, affordability, and equity—at
lower cost than the fossil-based alternatives they replace. Importantly, without restored
funding, DSGS will likely end after this year, cutting off a critical tool just as it’s scaling up.
The legislature created these clean energy programs in response to the historic grid
emergencies in 2022 to bring new flexible and responsive resources online and to help
transition away from the reliance on polluting peaker plants, like the state’s remaining once-
through-cooling (OTC) power plants and diesel backup generation, during times of grid stress.

Demand Side Grid Support (DSGS)
DSGS compensates existing electric customers that provide system-wide demand reduction
and backup generation through mechanisms such as virtual power plants (VPPs). This program
was initially deployed in the Summer of 2022 and has since grown to over 800 MW in capacity
this year—more than double what it delivered in 2024 and equivalent to a large peaker plant.
• The Governor’s January 2025 budget proposed allocating over $120 million in new
funding for DSGS, which was in accordance with the deal reached with the legislature in
2024. However, the May Revise effectively zeroes out new allocations to DSGS and
reverts $18 million from previously appropriated DSGS funds, resulting in a $140
million decrease.
• Since the program relies on aggregators, this funding decrease impacts their ability to
deploy emergency capacity in the short term and to scale their enrollment in future
years. Aggregators need confidence about the program’s longevity to continue
investing in market development and customer onboarding. Further, customers need
certainty in program length to estimate their returns upon participation.
Distributed Electricity Backup Assets (DEBA)
DEBA supports the development of new cleaner, more efficient distributed energy resources
(DERs), such as energy storage and microgrids, in communities across California. These
projects will not only provide direct reliability and affordability benefits locally but can also
participate as virtual power plants (VPPs) in programs like DSGS, delivering additional grid
support and cost savings to all California ratepayers.
• The Governor’s January 2025 budget proposed allocating $200 million in new funding
for DEBA, which was in accordance with the 2024 deal. However, the May Revise
decreases that commitment by $150 million, leaving $50 million for the program.
• While the remaining $50 million proposed may be sufficient to launch initial DEBA
projects, many Californians are still in need of clean backup generation. Vulnerable
populations and critical facilities like schools, medical centers, fire stations, and water
delivery facilities could benefit the most from a robust DEBA program.
DSGS and DEBA work best together. DSGS has already proven it can quickly deploy clean
capacity during emergencies, while DEBA will help expand the pool of distributed resources
that can contribute in the future. Cutting or scaling back these programs at this crucial juncture
would not only disrupt implementation but also damage California’s reputation as a reliable
partner for energy companies. This could have long-term negative effects on our ability to
attract and retain the resources and partnerships necessary to enhance load flexibility and
ensure grid resilience, goals that rely on distributed resource companies.

Given the critical importance of these programs to avoiding dire energy shortages, achieving
our state’s climate goals, and increasing equity in the energy transition, we urge you to restore
funding for the DSGS and DEBA programs.
Thank you for your attention to this important matter. We are available to discuss this further
and provide any additional information needed.
Sincerely,
Edson Perez Cheryl Auger
Senior Principal President
Advanced Energy United Ban SUP (Single Use Plastic)
Scott Murtishaw Kate Unger
Executive Director Senior Policy Advisor
California Energy Storage Alliance California Solar & Storage Association
Jose Torre-Bueno Maia Leroy
Executive Director Policy Director
Center for Community Energy Center for Energy Efficiency and Renewable
Technologies
Amy Findlay Ben Schwartz
Head of Policy Policy Manager
ChargeScape Clean Coalition
Derek Chernow Katie Guerry
Western Regional Director Senior VP of Regulatory and Government Affairs
Coalition for Community Solar Access Convergent Energy and Power
Claire Swingle Thomas Lee
Senior Analyst, Regulatory Affairs Founder & President
CPower Derapi
Vince Wong Scott Lipton
Chief Operating Officer Director, Energy Policy
ElectricFish Enchanted Rock

Gabriela Olmedo Jared Ballew
Regulatory Affairs Specialist US Policy Director
EnergyHub ev.energy
Anna Bella Korbatov Meredith Roberts
VP, Regulatory Affairs Director, Policy and Regulatory Affairs - West
Fermata Energy Generac
Elise Kalfayan Julia Pyper
Board Member Vice President of Public Affairs
Glendale Environmental Coalition GoodLeap
Jonathan Levy Collin Smith
Managing Director, US and Japan Regulatory Affairs Manager
Kaluza Leap
Franco Ghadiri Allie Detrio
Policy Representative Senior Advisor
Mainspring Energy Microgrid Resources Coalition
Steve Joseph Raghav Murali
Chief Executive Officer Director – Policy & Gov4ernment Affairs
Potrero Energy PowerFlex
Cliff Staton Scott Green
VP, Government Affairs Senior Government Affairs Manager
Renew Home San José Clean Energy
Kristel Watson Bena Chang
Chief Commercial Officer Director of Government and Legislative Affairs
Scale Microgrids Silicon Valley Clean Energy
Stephanie Doyle Lauren Nevitt
CA Director Senior Director of Public Policy
Solar Energy Industries Association Sunrun
Ellie Cohen Zach Woogen
CEO Executive Director
The Climate Center Vehicle-Grid Integration Council

Kimaya Abreu
Manager, Regulatory Affairs
Voltus
CC: The Honorable Ben Allen, Chair, Senate Budget Subcommittee No. 2 on Resources,
Environmental Protection and Energy
The Honorable Steve Bennet, Chair, Assembly Budget Subcommittee No. 4 on Climate
Crisis, Resources, Energy and Transportation
The Honorable Josh Becker, Chair, Senate Energy, Utilities and Communications
Committee
The Honorable Rosilicie Ochoa Bogh, Vice Chair, Senate Energy, Utilities and
Communications Committee
The Honorable Cottie Petrie-Norris, Chair, Assembly Utilities and Energy Committee
The Honorable Joe Patterson, Vice Chair, Assembly Utilities and Energy Committee