BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
FILED
03/13/25
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 21-06-017
04:59 PM
Modernize the Electric Grid for a High (Filed June 24, 2021)
R2106017
Distributed Energy Resources Future.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL TO ASSIGNED
COMMISSIONER’S AND ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE’S RULING SEEKING
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FROM PARTIES, SETTING FORTH FURTHER
DIRECTION, AND MODIFYING SCHEDULE FOR TRACK 3
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
1401 21st St., Suite 5409
Sacramento, California 95811
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
Grace Pratt
Caliber Strategies
801 K Street, Suite 2800
Sacramento, CA 95814
Telephone: (818) 264-6437
Email: grace@caliberstrat.com
Date: March 13, 2025

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 21-06-017
Modernize the Electric Grid for a High (Filed June 24, 2021)
Distributed Energy Resources Future.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL TO ASSIGNED
COMMISSIONER’S AND ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE’S RULING SEEKING
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FROM PARTIES, SETTING FORTH FURTHER
DIRECTION, AND MODIFYING SCHEDULE FOR TRACK 3
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) hereby submits
these comments to the Administrative Law Judge’s Ruling Seeking Additional Information from
Parties, Setting Forth Further Direction, and Modifying Schedule for Track 3 (“Ruling”) filed by
Commissioner Darcie Houck, Administrative Law Judge (“ALJ”) Justin Regnier, and ALJ
Manisha Lakhanpal on February 7, 2025 and the Email Ruling Granting Schedule Amendment
(R.21-06-017) filed by ALJ Justin Regnier on February 20, 2025.
I. INTRODUCTION.
VGIC appreciates the Commission moving forward discussions on the development of
flexible service connections (“FSCs”) and the operational flexibility discussed in the Smart
Inverter Operationalization Working Group (“SIOWG”). As discussed by many parties in this
proceeding, there are significant benefits that can be provided by FSCs and general operational
flexibility, including the potential to save ratepayers over $23 billion in distribution upgrade costs
by 2035. There are both near- and long-term opportunities for FSCs to provide grid services. Given
the parallel rulings between this proceeding and the Energization Timelines Rulemaking (R.24-
2

01-018), VGIC will largely focus this set of comments on longer-term opportunities for FSCs and
the questions outlined in this Ruling.
II. RULING QUESTIONS.
1. In response to the SIO Reports, parties generally supported prioritizing flexible grid
connections, interconnection and grid services, operational flexibility with firm/non-firm
capacity, and non-firm export/import limits in Track 3 of this rulemaking. Given these initial
comments, where do parties believe implementation of changes will be most effective in
ensuring that Distribution System Operators and DERs have the necessary flexible grid
connections to enable the use cases outlined in the SIOWG report?
VGIC believes that the most important steps California can take to enable the business and
use cases outlined in the SIOWG Report is to create a standardized FSC framework for imports
and exports that incorporates both firm and non-firm components. This includes the creation of
customer agreements for these types of arrangements (i.e., Flexible Service Connection
Agreements or “FSCA”), schedules for firm import and export limits (i.e., Flexible Service
Connections or “FSC”), rules around the allocation of firm and non-firm import and export
capacity, and communications protocols for sharing non-firm import and export schedules.
In the near-term, there is significant potential to leverage static but variable firm import
limits, or limited load profiles (“LLPs”), to parallel the existing Limited Generation Profiles
(“LGPs”) to begin to create FSCs. VGIC shares more recommendations for implementing LLPs
in response to the parallel ALJ Ruling in R.24-01-018. In the long-term, non-firm import and
export capacity will also need to be unlocked to enable the use cases outlined in the SIOWG report.
These will all require practical rules and agreements to be implemented.
3

2. How can flexible grid connections and associated tools contribute to meeting the needs of
a decarbonized future with regards to addressing timely energization (medium and long
term), including distribution system capacity shortfalls, equitable access to the grid, and cost
containment?
One of the most important benefits of flexible grid connections is allowing for
electrification to occur more quickly, helping California achieve its air quality and climate goals,
and saving ratepayers significant amounts of money. Adding new load to the system will put
downward pressure on rates, but new load will also require additional grid investments. Therefore,
shaping load, especially EV load, is critical to ensuring affordability. Optimal load shapes will
maximize the kWh sales of electricity while minimizing the need for additional investments in
grid infrastructure or electricity generation resources. California has already begun to quantify the
impact of shaping load. For example, the Electrification Impact Study by Kevala conducted in this
proceeding estimated that transportation electrification will cost $36.2 billion in distribution
upgrades by 2035; this is largely due to Kevala’s assumption that there will be little or no managed
charging and a very high evening peak.1 Cal Advocates has shown that by shaping EV load to the
average load profile from the Integrated Energy Policy Report (“IEPR”), these costs reduce by
37% to $22.7 billion.2 Optimizing load profiles based on local feeder conditions can further reduce
costs, saving ratepayers almost $23 billion or 63% of Kevala’s original estimated distribution
upgrade costs.3 These significant ratepayer savings should be pursued, and the Commission should
find ways to shape load to minimize distribution upgrade costs.
1 Kevala prepared for CPUC. Electrification Impacts Study Part I: Bottom-Up Load Forecasting and System-Level
Electrification Impacts Cost Estimates. May 9, 2023. https://cdn.prod.website-
files.com/62a236e9692c48cff36898da/6462917ab8a790b6b85f5fbb_CPUC%20Kevala%20EIS%20Part%201.pdf
2 Cal Advocates, DGEM 2.0 Preliminary Results, October 21, 2024 at slide 10.
https://www.publicadvocates.cpuc.ca.gov/-/media/cal-advocates-website/files/press-room/reports-and-
analyses/241024-public-advocates-office-dgem-20-preliminary-results.pdf
3 Ibid at slide 11.
4

While there are many tools to shape load, such as time-varying / dynamic rates and demand
response programs, FSC is one of the only frameworks that guarantees that load will stay below
a certain level by utilizing PCS to place physical import limits on a site. Therefore, if a utility or
LSE is depending on a customer to have a particular load shape or to provide load reduction during
circuit, there will be a very high degree of trust that the load shape will be adhered to. This can
increase the ability for DERs, such as EVs, to provide grid services such as Resource Adequacy
credit from load modification.
While all stakeholders are concerned about energization as an immediate and near-term
issue, energization delays are likely to persist for many years. The amount of load expected to be
added to the grid is expected to increase by over 5,000 GWh each year for the next ten years, a
30% increase between 2025 and 2036.4 This makes maximizing flexible connection options even
more important, as customers will likely rely on them for over a decade.
3. When considering the examination of static (i.e., firm) and dynamic (i.e., non-firm) flexible
grid connections for imports and exports: (a) What are the project type and specific
examples that would benefit from the development of the more complex use cases identified
in the High-DER Proceeding and SIO Report(s) record to date involving non-firm import
and export limits? Explain if these project types are load only, generation only, or combined
load and generation.
For EV customers, VGIC anticipates many customers in different scenarios that could
leverage the complex use cases identified in the SIOWG report. Specifically, VGIC anticipates
EV customers leveraging “Use Case 1: Scheduling of Firm Export Limits and Non-Firm Export
Capacity” and “Use Case 4: Operational Flexibility in Import Limits and Non-Firm Import
Capacity” to unlock “Business Case A: Operational Flexibility in DER Interconnection or Limited
4 Data from Draft 2024 Integrated Energy Policy Report. https://www.energy.ca.gov/publications/2024/2024-
integrated-energy-policy-report-update
5

Load Profiles” or “Business Case C: Operational Flexibility for Distribution Services under
Normal Conditions.” VGIC anticipates that there will be both load-only and combined load and
generation projects that utilize both unidirectional and bidirectional EVs, as well as other DERs
such as stationary solar and storage.
One example of a potential complex project that would benefit from the development of
firm and non-firm import and export limits is a school with a fleet of electric school buses. The
school bus is a sector where bidirectional vehicles and EVSE are increasingly common. School
buses also have common and similar schedules day after day, with periods of utilization split across
the day and longer periods of downtime. This makes school buses ideal to provide vehicle-to-grid
exports, which is already done today. School buses would also benefit from firm and non-firm
export capacity to reduce export-related upgrade costs associated with Rule 21, similar to other
DERs such as solar and stationary storage. A school bus fleet could also leverage firm and non-
firm import limits to optimize charging, especially in edge use cases. Schools are commonly used
as community centers, including cooling centers during the summertime and resilience centers
during power outages. VGIC anticipates a scenario where a school bus fleet could receive a
relatively low firm import capacity allocation during the summertime, when normal school bus
routes are reduced. However, if an outage is likely or the school anticipates providing cooling
services in the summertime, the school bus fleet could leverage hours of increased non-firm
capacity to charge up over a longer period. The fleet could then discharge to power the school
during the outage or even during net peak periods when air conditioner is on to reduce electricity
costs. There is also the potential to create a school microgrid, where the EV fleet, solar, storage,
and other DERs can coordinate to provide optimal services to the school, fleet, and grid by
blending flexible import and export capacity.
6

(b) Based on your response to question 3(a), what import and export limiting technology will
be needed?
Power control systems are needed to enable flexible imports and exports overall. In order
to unlock non-firm import and export capabilities, the DSOs will also need systems to monitor
distribution system conditions and communicate changes in non-firm import / export limits to
DERs, likely through a Distributed Energy Resource Management Systems (DERMS).
4. As the investor-owned utilities operationalize Advanced Distribution Management
Systems and Distributed Energy Resource Management Systems (DERMS), which types and
sizes of DERs should be able to communicate with the DERMS in each system development
stage and for which SIOWG use case?
To enable Use Cases 1 and 4 on flexible import and export limits with non-firm capacity,
any device that will be used to control DER operations in response to the grid signal will need to
be capable of communicating with the DERMS. In many cases, the PCS will need to communicate
with the DERMS platform, since this device will ensure compliance with sent grid signals.
However, other devices, such as EV supply equipment (EVSE) or EVs themselves through
onboard telematics may also be integrated with DERMS platforms. EV drivers often have access
to apps or other platforms that interact with their EV or EVSE and can be used to provide
information for charging optimization. By allowing these devices to receive DERMS signals as
well, it could unlock improved optimization of charging and load shaping in general.
5. Since the SIO Ruling was issued in May 2024, have any new developments occurred with
technology, Commission proceedings, certifications or methods for addressing SIO reports,
or use cases that should be reflected in the record of this proceeding?
7

The second edition of UL 3141 to certify PCS was published in October 2024, which
includes parameters for Power Import Limiting and Power Export Limiting schedules.
6. How should the Commission evaluate the cost-effectiveness and rate impact of SIOWG
use cases and methods for operationalizing them?
VGIC recommends that the Commission consider the full benefits of operational flexibility
with a focus on Business Cases instead of technical use cases. Business Cases, such as Business
Case A: Operational Flexibility in DER Interconnection or Limited Load Profiles, is ultimately
what will reduce customer rates. Having the technical capability of scheduling firm or non-firm
imports or exports does not save ratepayers any money if there is no contractual framework or
program to enable these capabilities to be used. The Commission also needs to incentivize
customers to utilize these systems in ways that are beneficial to customers. This will likely involve
forms of financial compensation, but payments will likely be less than ratepayer savings.
VGIC also believes that the Commission should conduct specific cost-effectiveness
evaluations for EV load and bidirectional (V2X) exports utilizing flexible service connections. As
discussed above, initial investigations have found significant potential or ratepayer savings. These
analyses should consider savings from reduced distribution infrastructure upgrades, increased
electricity sales from charging, and the potential for reduced needs for transmission investments
and new bulk grid capacity resources. Other non-rate benefits, such as reduced air pollution from
electrified transportation and increased resiliency, should also be considered by the Commission.
7. What, if any, additional information should the Commission consider in development of a
proposal for addressing the issues in Track 3?
VGIC does not have additional feedback at this time.
8

III. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide this response to the Ruling. We look forward
to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: March 13, 2025
9