BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
FILED
03/27/25
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Establish Rulemaking 24-01-018
04:59 PM
Energization Timelines. (Filed January 25, 2024)
R2401018
REPLY COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE’S RULING CLARIFYING NEXT STEPS FOR
FLEXIBLE SERVICE CONNECTIONS, MODIFYING PHASE 2 SCHEDULE, AND
REQUESTING PARTY COMMENTS
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
1401 21st St., Suite 5409
Sacramento, California 95811
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
Grace Pratt
Caliber Strategies
801 K Street, Suite 2800
Sacramento, CA 95814
Telephone: (818) 264-6437
Email: grace@caliberstrat.com
Date: March 27, 2025

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Establish Rulemaking 24-01-018
Energization Timelines. (Filed January 25, 2024)
REPLY COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE’S RULING CLARIFYING NEXT STEPS FOR
FLEXIBLE SERVICE CONNECTIONS, MODIFYING PHASE 2 SCHEDULE, AND
REQUESTING PARTY COMMENTS
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) hereby submits
these reply comments to the Administrative Law Judge’s Ruling Clarifying Next Steps for Flexible
Service Connections, Modifying Phase 2 Schedule, and Requesting Party Comments (“Ruling”)
filed by Administrative Law Judge (“ALJ”) Justin Regnier on February 7, 2025, Email Ruling
Correcting Error in the February 7, 2025, Administrative Law Judge’s Ruling Re: Filing Date For
Reply Comments filed by ALJ Carolyn Sisto and ALJ Justin Regnier on February 10, 2025, and
E-Mail Ruling Granting Schedule Amendment filed by ALJ Justin Regnier on February 20, 2025.
I. OPENING COMMENTS REVEAL A SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCE IN THE
CURRENT IMPLEMENTATION AND FUTURE VISION OF FLEXIBLE
SERVICE CONNECTION BETWEEN PG&E AND SCE.
Opening comments, namely from Pacific Gas and Electric (“PG&E”) and Southern
California Edison (“SCE”) reveal disjointed approaches to flexible service connection (“FSC”).
While VGIC has been able to gain a high-level understanding of PG&E and SCE’s pilots through
anecdotal evidence gathered from its members, conversations with PG&E and SCE staff, and the
utilities’ July 8, 2024 filings in R.21-06-017, VGIC is struck by the different interpretations the
2

two utilities employ in opening comments. Specifically, PG&E notes that UL 3141-certified
equipment is not required to implement safe FSC, while SCE states it is absolutely required. Based
on this difference, VGIC posits PG&E may be operating with more caution, offering customers
load limits that yield a larger “buffer” for its distribution grid. This would preserve more headroom
on its distribution assets relative to SCE. In this way, it is possible that SCE is permitting far more
FSC per site/project than PG&E, and, as a result, PG&E ratepayers may be missing out on
opportunities to stave off unnecessary costs and benefit from transportation electrification per SB
350 and other state policy goals.
On the other hand, given the requirement for UL 3141, SCE may be enabling fewer FSC
opportunities than PG&E overall in the near-term, as UL 3141 is a new standard that site
developers and technology providers may not yet be capable of implementing at scale. In contrast,
PG&E’s ability to advance FSC sites that do not utilize UL 3141 may be enabling more
electrification and distribution deferral/avoidance overall. This could be a contributing factor to
the disparate FSC site counts presented by each utility: over a hundred for PG&E and eleven for
SCE.1
Yet another potential explanation for the vast difference in FSC site counts is that PG&E’s
service territory may be experiencing significantly more EV service requests at locations with grid
constraints, whereas SCE may have EV charging site requests at more areas with more available
capacity.
Ultimately, VGIC concedes that no party other than the utilities possesses the visibility to
assess which of these cases is true. The inherent information asymmetry (i.e., the absence of real-
time, high-accuracy integration capacity analysis (ICA) data portals) surrounding this issue hinders
1 PG&E Opening Comments at 4 and SCE Opening Comments at 5.
3

parties’ ability to interpret the relative effectiveness of each utility’s approach. With this in mind,
and considering the imperative to accelerate energization timelines and reduce ratepayer risk
associated with the up to $50 billion in estimated distribution system upgrade costs,2 VGIC urges
the Commission to consider the utilities’ approaches with the express aim of ensuring that the most
fundamental elements of flexible service connection are consistent across these two major
investor-owned utilities.
In the below reply comments, VGIC offers recommendations to better align each approach
and, critically, to ensure clear reporting on the use of FSC within each utility service territory. In
considering these and other party recommendations, we respectfully caution the Commission
against overlooking the importance of establishing consistency in favor of addressing the issue in
a timely manner. In other words, the Commission should balance the urgent need to establish FSC
options with the criticality of ensuring these options are scalable and consistent across utilities.
II. RESPONSE TO COMMENTS AIMING TO CREATE CONSISTENCY ACROSS
FLEXIBLE SERVICE CONNECTION OFFERINGS PROVIDED BY EACH
UTILITY.
VGIC agrees with those parties suggesting that FSC offerings and enrollment processes be
made as consistent as possible across IOU service territories. While VGIC acknowledges that the
IOUs are at different stages of FSC development and deployment, there is significant value in
establishing a uniform foundation for FSC implementation statewide.
VGIC understands that the current status of FSC offerings are:
• PG&E:
2 CPUC / Kevala Energy Impact Study Phase 1.
4

o Offering static, firm Limited Load Profiles (“LLPs”) and FSC via Load Limit
Letters. These typically use a 4-value LLP with two seasons and two time periods
- restricted and unrestricted.
o PG&E also offers a dynamic, non-firm LLP layered on top of static limits through
its Flex Connect pilot, which provides hourly LLPs communicated daily.
• SCE:
o Offering static, firm LLPs and FSC through the Localized Autonomous LCMS
pilot, typically a 6-value LLP with three seasons and two time periods - restricted
and unrestricted.
o SCE is working to offer a dynamic, non-firm LLP through a Communications-
Based LCMS, but still requires additional DERMS capabilities to be implemented
before rolling this out to customers.
• SDG&E: Does not offer any FSCs at this time.
VGIC believes that it is appropriate for the utilities to move forward with FSC implementation at
different paces if they have different technical capabilities. For example, PG&E should continue
to move forward with the implementation of dynamic LLPs through its Flex Connect pilot, even
if the other IOUs do not currently have the technical capability to offer this.
That said, VGIC strongly urges the Commission and IOUs to coordinate on standardizing FSC
offerings wherever feasible. At a minimum, the following elements should be aligned:
• Universal Static, Firm LLP Offerings: All IOUs should offer a basic, static, firm LLP
option with a simple value structure. PG&E and SCE already provide this, and a
comparable offering should be introduced in SDG&E territory.
5

• Customer Agreements: Forms and participation agreements for FSCs should be
consistent across utilities. SCE’s Form 16-332 provides a template, and VGIC assumes
PG&E has a similar agreement associated with its Load Limit Letters and Flex Connect
pilot. Standardizing these forms will improve transparency and facilitate participation for
customers operating in multiple IOU territories.
• Terms for Modifying Firm Limits: SCE’s current LCMS pilot allows the utility to
modify firm limits at its sole discretion, and it is unclear if PG&E has similar terms in its
FSC agreements or Load Limit Letters. This practice raises reliability concerns for
customers, especially EV fleet operators, who depend on assured import capabilities. VGIC
agrees with IREC that the ability to modify static, firm LLPs should be limited to clearly
defined, transparent circumstances.3 These parameters should be included in FSC
agreements and standardized across all IOUs.
• Capacity Allocation Methodology Across Multiple Customers: While initial
implementations from both PG&E and SCE have applied to a single customer on a given
circuit, VGIC recommends the Commission approve a consistent methodology across all
investor-owned utilities for allocating available electrical capacity on a circuit across
multiple customers. Some example methodologies include “first come, first served” and
clustering sites based on the timing of the load request. Methodologies could also be
informed by those used in other jurisdictions and for other technologies, for example,
distributed generation.
• Utility Reporting Requirements: D.24-09-020 requires utilities to answer the following
questions, on a per site/project basis: “If full energization of the applicant’s site was not
3 IREC Opening Comments at 5.
6

feasible in a timely manner, explain whether any load management or flexible service
options were installed or utilized to provide the applicant with timely service” and “the
amount of load (kW) that was provided to the applicant using flexible service options, the
remaining (or total) load requested by the applicant, and an estimate for when full service
will be provided to the applicant.” While this reporting will be informative for parties to
understand the effectiveness of FSC and develop policies accordingly, VGIC details in
Section III below additional reporting elements that should be applied consistently across
all three large investor-owned utilities.
As SCE and SDG&E move toward offering dynamic FSCs and non-firm import limits, the
Commission and IOUs should also promote alignment in dynamic FSC structures,
communications protocols, and enrollment processes.
III. ADDITIONAL REPORTING IS NEEDED ON FLEXIBLE SERVICE
CONNECTIONS.
VGIC commends the Commission for establishing reporting requirements related to FSC
in D.24-09-020. Specifically, questions #25 and #26 of the Energization Target Reporting
Template Requirements seek to understand, on a per-site/project basis, whether any load
management or FSC was utilized and the amount of energized load (kW) relative to requested
load. While the IOUs’ inaugural energization target reports have not yet been released, VGIC is
aware of recent updates in a handful of one-off documents, like the Bridging Strategies
Compliance Reports and PG&E’s OpFlex Pilot Report.
To improve transparency and inform future program design, VGIC reiterates its
recommendation that the Commission require additional reporting on FSC participation, for
7

example, by amending the Energization Target Reporting Template Requirements instituted in
D.24-09-020. Key per-site/project data points that are absent include:
• Whether the site has also filed a Rule 21 interconnection application request (e.g.,
for energy storage systems) and, if so, the anonymized Rule 21 project ID # that
corresponds to the quarterly Rule 21 report required in D.20-09-035 Ordering
Paragraph (“OP”) 22.
• Whether FSC was:
o Proposed by the utility (i.e., following utility assessment / TE advisory
services consultation)
o Accepted by the customer (i.e., following utility recommendation)
o Proposed by the customer (i.e., following customer/vendor assessment of
Integration Capacity Analysis or “ICA”)
o Accepted by the utility (i.e., following customer request)
• For sites that move forward with FSC:
o The type of FSC enabling technology used (e.g., power control systems,
battery energy storage systems, customer generation, traditional controls
like protective relays, etc.)
o Whether static or dynamic FSC was implemented
▪ If static FSC was implemented, the type of FSC schedule
implemented (e.g., single-value, 4-/6-value, 288-value LLP etc.)
o How much leftover headroom capacity is available on the circuit (kW)
▪ VGIC expects many near-term, bridge FSCs to use all available
capacity, but in cases where FSCs do not use all available capacity,
8

the IOUs should report on how much capacity is left over for other
potential customers.
While VGIC recommends this reporting be integrated into the required energization
timeline reporting, other venues for this reporting, if the Commission prefers, could include the
quarterly Rule 21 interconnection timeline reports required by D.20-09-035 Ordering Paragraph
(“OP”) 22, the semi-annual reports on Vehicle-Grid Integration Strategies per D.20-12-029, or the
annual Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure Cost Report. VGIC emphasizes that this
recommendation is not intended to add unnecessary reporting burdens, but rather to ensure the
availability of essential information that will guide effective FSC policy development moving
forward. For example, this data can help answer the following questions:
• How many customers are utilities approaching with opportunistic FSC options?
• How many customers elect FSC pathways, and which ones are most effective in
accelerating energization timelines? (e.g., static single-value, 4-/6-value, 288-value
limits? Dynamic load control?)
• How many customers elect FSC enabling technologies, and which ones are most
effective in accelerating energization timelines? (e.g., power control systems,
protective relays, etc.)?
• What types of FSC pathways and technologies are most common?
• How does the customer election of flexible service pathways and technologies
impact energization timelines? How does this differ by FSC pathway and
enabling technology type?
9

IV. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these reply comments on the Ruling. We look
forward to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: March 27, 2025
10