BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
FILED
08/14/25
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 22-07-005
04:59 PM
Advance Demand Flexibility (Filed July 14, 2022)
R2207005
Through Electric Rates.
OPENING COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON
THE PROPOSED DECISION ADOPTING GUIDELINES FOR PACIFIC GAS AND
ELECTRIC COMPANY, SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EDISON COMPANY, AND SAN
DIEGO GAS & ELECTRIC COMPANY ON DEMAND FLEXIBILITY RATE DESIGN
PROPOSALS
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
1401 21st St., Suite 5409
Sacramento, California 95811
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
Grace Pratt
Caliber Strategies
801 K Street, Suite 2800
Sacramento, CA 95814
Telephone: (818) 264-6437
Email: grace@caliberstrat.com
Date: August 14, 2025

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Rulemaking 22-07-005
Advance Demand Flexibility (Filed July 14, 2022)
Through Electric Rates.
OPENING COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON
THE PROPOSED DECISION ADOPTING GUIDELINES FOR PACIFIC GAS AND
ELECTRIC COMPANY, SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EDISON COMPANY, AND SAN
DIEGO GAS & ELECTRIC COMPANY ON DEMAND FLEXIBILITY RATE DESIGN
PROPOSALS
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) hereby submits
these opening comments on the Proposed Decision Adopting Guidelines for Pacific Gas and
Electric Company, Southern California Edison Company, and San Diego Gas & Electric Company
On Demand Flexibility Rate Design Proposals (“Proposed Decision” or “PD”), issued by
Administrative Law Judges Rajan Mutialu and Carolyn Sisto on July 25, 2025.
I. INTRODUCTION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to comment on the PD and the next stage of development
for California’s dynamic rate vision. VGIC strongly believes that electric vehicles (“EVs”) are
well-positioned to take advantage of dynamic pricing and provide immense ratepayer value via
load flexibility and EV battery discharge. Vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”) strategies, including
managed unidirectional charging, bidirectional charging and discharging, and distributed energy
resource (“DER”)-paired charging, can unlock EVs as strategic grid assets, including through
participation in dynamic rates. These price signals can directly influence customer behavior or
1

integrate with automated charging management systems for a “behind the scenes” customer
experience. In other words, VGI strategies will play a key role in helping California meet its
ambitious clean energy and transportation electrification goals, while alleviating upward pressure
on rates. The dynamic rates developed under this guidance to comply with the California Energy
Commission’s (“CEC”) Load Management Standards (“LMS”) are one key tool to unlock these
benefits.
In response to the PD, VGIC offers recommendations to ensure that dynamic rates unlock
maximum load flexibility, particularly from EVs. Our comments are summarized below:
• VGIC strongly urges the Commission to modify the PD to explicitly direct the IOUs to
offer dynamic export compensation for non-Net Energy Metering (“NEM”), non-
Qualifying Facility (“QF”) customer resources and aggregations, as supported by the
record of this proceeding.
o Providing dynamic export compensation through demand flexibility rates will
unlock grid services from EVs that are otherwise unavailable.
o The record references sufficient precedent in support of establishing non-NEM,
non-QF retail export compensation rates.
o The Commission has previously adopted and authorized significant ratepayer
investment in non-NEM, non-QF export compensation initiatives.
o The Commission-adopted Demand Flexibility Design Principles specifically
includes offering dynamic export compensation to all export-capable DERs.
• The Commission should consider alternative structures to unlock distribution-level load
flexibility, including programmatic approaches.
2

• The Commission should allow for flexibility in customer protection measures.
II. VGIC STRONGLY URGES THE COMMISSION TO EXPLICITLY DIRECT THE
IOUS TO OFFER DYNAMIC EXPORT COMPENSATION FOR NON-NEM NON-
QF CUSTOMER RESOURCES AND AGGREGATIONS OF CUSTOMER
RESOURCES.
Although the Commission’s own Demand Flexibility Design Principles includes and the
Staff Proposal recommends that dynamic rates include technology-agnostic export compensation,
the current PD “declines to provide guidance on whether the Large IOUs should include export
compensation in DF Rate Proposals.”1 VGIC believes this is unsupported by the record and
strongly disagrees with this determination. We urge the Commission to direct the IOUs to offer
dynamic export compensation within their demand flexibility (“DF”) rates.
A. Providing dynamic export compensation through demand flexibility rates will
unlock grid services from EVs that are otherwise unavailable.
The Commission can unlock far greater value from EV customers and fleets by providing
customers with the needed price signal to not only shift load but also export energy during peak
times. By compensating customers for exporting energy during periods of high system demand,
these rates can enhance grid reliability, reduce the need for costly peak-period procurement, and
increase other grid services provided by EVs. For EV customers and fleets in particular, dynamic
export compensation enables them to contribute to both load reduction and energy supply,
unlocking additional value that is otherwise unavailable under import-only rate designs. As
discussed by VGIC in comments on the Working Group Report, without export compensation, the
potential grid value is limited to the avoided charging that would have occurred in a given period,
leaving the opportunity to send energy back to the grid when it is needed most entirely untapped.2
1 PD at 87.
2 VGIC Opening Comments on Working Group Report at 5.
3

VGIC believes that the Commission should leverage this bidirectional charging capability and
direct the IOUs to implement, or build on existing implementations of, dynamic export rates.
It is important to leverage this capability in dynamic rates because there are limited
opportunities in California for EVs to provide exports to the grid. California currently provides
export compensation for EVs in some demand response programs, such as the Emergency Load
Reduction Program (“ELRP”) and the Demand Side Grid Support (“DSGS”) program, which are
both event-based and do not allow EVs to provide regular exports for daily load shifting.
Additionally, the ELRP is only authorized through 2027, while DSGS has not been provided with
any further funding from the legislature, signaling its likely sunset prior to the 2027 timeframe for
the large IOUs’ dynamic rates. Pacific Gas and Electric (“PG&E”) and San Diego Gas and Electric
(“SDG&E”) also have pilots that compensate for EV exports, PG&E’s Vehicle-to-Everything
(“V2X”) Pilots and SDG&E’s Dynamic Export Rate Pilot, but both are tied to developing and
advancing the dynamic rates that will be developed pursuant to this PD’s guidance.
Additionally, large IOUs currently steer bidirectional charging customers seeking
compensation away from Net Energy Metering (“NEM”) or Net Billing Tariff (“NBT”) export
compensation provided to solar customers. These tariffs designed for “eligible customer
generators”, defined in statute as a customer “who uses a renewable electrical generation facility.”3
For example, in order for energy storage to participate in NEM or NBT, it must be “an addition or
enhancement to a renewable electrical generation facility,” and “configured and metered in order
to ensure that NEM credit can only be generated by eligible renewable electric generation.”4
Although VGIC believes there are existing strategies that can be leveraged to ensure bidirectional
3 PUC Section 2827.
4 D.14-05-033 at 15.
4

charging systems do not violate these so-called “NEM-integrity” rules and other NEM energy
storage requirements, the large IOUs’ practice of nudging these customers away from NEM or
NBT demonstrates another realm where willing bidirectional charging customers are not
welcomed to provide valuable services to the grid and, in turn, help alleviate system and ratepayer
costs.
Notably, California has already shown the potential for dynamic rates to unlock significant
export capacity from EVs. The largest grid-parallel bidirectional charging site in North America
is located at the Oakland Unified School District and participating in PG&E’s V2X pilot with
dynamic export compensation, providing 2.1 GWh of energy back to the grid each year.5 Similar
projects could be deployed across fleets and EVs statewide, multiplying the reliability and cost-
saving benefits for the grid. However, absent proactive direction from the Commission requiring
the IOUs to offer export compensation, California will be unable to build on this effort to maximize
the available EV capacity and grid services from this flexible resource. For example, We have
already seen Southern California Edison (“SCE”) operating out of alignment with the
Commission’s vision in implementing their expanded dynamic rate pilot. D.24-01-032 includes an
Attachment B specifically dedicated to the treatment of bidirectional charging equipment within
the expanded rate pilot. However, D.24-01-032 did not include specific Commission direction to
SCE to provide compensation for non-NEM exports. SCE has indicated that these non-NEM
customers are not eligible for the expanded dynamic rate pilot.6 VGIC believes that without explicit
5 See “Zum Launches Nation’s First School District with 100% Electric, Bidirectional V2G School Bus
Fleet in Oakland” https://www.ridezum.com/press-release/zum-launches-nations-first-school-district-
with-100-electric-bidirectional-v2g-school-bus-fleet-in-oakland/
6 In response to a recent data request from Cal Advocates, SCE states “while not explicitly discussed in
our implementation plan, Net Energy Meter (NEM) and Solar Billing Plan (SBP) customers are eligible
to participate in the expanded pilot.” (see
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/SupDoc/A2403019/7847/546561478.pdf page B-12). When Cal
5

direction from the Commission, the large IOUs will not support non-NEM export compensation
in the dynamic rate pilots. In turn, the grid benefits of VGI will remain latent, representing an
immense missed opportunity to mitigate upward pressure on rates.
B. The record references that sufficient precedent exists in support of establishing
non-NEM, non-QF retail export compensation rates.
It is unclear to VGIC why the Commission does not direct the IOUs to adopt export
compensation rates in the PD. One item the IOUs have raised is that “Non-NEM, non-QF export
compensation may raise questions about the boundary between retail and wholesale jurisdiction,”7
which is cited in the PD. However, there is sufficient precedent to show that export compensation
can be established for non-PURPA qualifying facilities by state utility regulatory commissions.
VGIC references in its comments on the staff proposal8 the Value of Distributed Energy Resources
(“VDER”) tariff design used in New York. Specifically, the New York Public Service Commission
(“NY PSC”) established an avoided cost-based VDER in a March 2017 order (“VDER Transition
Order”).9 In the March 2017 VDER Transition Order, the Commission states, “VDER tariffs will
be expanded beyond NEM-eligible [Distributed Generation (DG)] technologies to all DER in a
technologically-neutral, value-focused manner as soon as practicable.”10 In addition, the VDER
Transition Order directed that stand-alone energy storage projects be eligible under the VDER
Advocates asked “Please explain what requirements must be met for customers enrolled in the Expanded
Pilot to export load,” SCE responded by stating “Customers enrolled in NEM 1.0, NEM 2.0, or SBP and
enrolled in an eligible pilot rate, and are not enrolled in any disqualifying demand response programs,
would be eligible to participate in the pilot and receive credits for exporting load.” (see
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/SupDoc/A2403019/7847/546561478.pdf at page B-14).
7 Working Group Report at 95.
8 VGIC Comments on Track B Working Group Report at 9.
9 Case 15-E-0751, et al., Order on Net Energy Metering Transition, Phase One of Value of Distributed
Energy Resources, and Related Matters (issued March 9, 2017) (Phase One VDER Order)
10 Ibid.
6

tariff "as expeditiously as possible."11 NY Department of Public Service (“DPS”) staff then
published a staff whitepaper, which details unified, technology-agnostic, avoided cost-based
export compensation. VGIC views this whitepaper as directly analogous to the CPUC Energy
Division staff’s Advanced Strategies for Demand Flexibility Management and Customer DER
Compensation (“2022 CalFUSE Whitepaper”) and the subsequent 2023 Staff Report filed in this
proceeding, which also envisions providing unified, technology-agnostic, avoided cost-based
export compensation. Critically, the NY DPS staff whitepaper proposed that standalone energy
storage, including storage paired with consumption load, be eligible for VDER tariff for any hourly
injections to the grid. 12 NY DPS staff proposed that Value Stack compensation be determined and
calculated as for existing resources. Under the NY DPS staff whitepaper section titled “Mitigating
Inequities to Non Participants,” the NY DPS staff proposal also required that standalone storage
customers take service on hourly pricing, such that both charges and credits accurately reflect
hourly values. This, too, is directly analogous to the CPUC ED staff’s 2022 CalFUSE Whitepaper
focus on “symmetrical” pricing, ensuring that both consumption and export are priced fairly. In its
September 12, 2018, Order on Value Stack Eligibility Expansion and Other Matters, the NY PSC
adopted the NY DPS staff proposal, thereby instituting non-NEM, non-QF export
compensation for customers of New York utilities. Critically, VDER is not a pilot, like
California’s ELRP or PG&E’s V2X Pilots – rather, it is a mass-market, cost-based tariff, fully
adopted by utilities and made available to all interested customers. Similar to the position of
California’s IOUs’, the NY Joint Utilities also argued that “larger resources, including storage
resources, should be required to seek energy and capacity compensation from the wholesale market
11 Ibid.
12 Case 15-E-0751, Staff Proposal on Value Stack Eligibility Expansion (filed May 22, 2018).
7

rather than receiving those elements as part of the Value Stack” (i.e., where wholesale market price
signals are “passed through,” just as proposed in this PD). The NY Order then states, in no
uncertain terms, that “The Staff Proposal provides a rational and appropriate framework for
the eligibility of standalone storage and it is therefore adopted.”13 Lastly, the Order explicitly
deems vehicle-to-grid (“V2G”) systems as eligible. In 2023, the NY DPS expanded on the
eligibility finding for V2G systems by further explicitly directing each utility to ensure V2G
systems are eligible.14
Although the NY Joint Utilities argued, similar to the CA IOUs, that these non-NEM, non-
QF resources should be participating in the wholesale market, the PSC found and later reaffirmed
that non-NEM, non-QF systems are to be provided with the technology-neutral, avoided cost-
based export compensation. With this in mind, VGIC strongly recommends the CPUC explicitly
direct the IOUs to establish dynamic export compensation for non-NEM non-QF resources. Not
only were these resources specifically envisioned as eligible in the 2022 whitepaper, the 2023
decision adopting rate design principles, and the 2024 decision adopting expanded dynamic rate
pilot, but there is no factual basis for the IOUs’ assertions that export compensation cannot
be provided to these resources.
Regarding the impact of these policies, it is worth highlighting that New York customers
with non-NEM, non-QF resources, including V2G resources, have been actively enrolling in
13 NY PSC Case 15-E-0751 – In the Matter of the Value of Distributed Energy Resources and NY PSC
Case 15-E-0082 – Proceeding on Motion of the Commission as to the Policies, Requirements and
Conditions for Implementing a Community Net Metering Program. Order on Value Stack Eligibility
Expansion and Other Matters. September 12, 2018. Page 16.
14 NY PSC, CASE 18-E-0138 - Proceeding on Motion of the Commission Regarding Electric Vehicle
Supply Equipment and Infrastructure. Order Approving Midpoint Review Whitepaper’s Recommendations
with Modifications. November 16, 2023.
https://documents.dps.ny.gov/public/Common/ViewDoc.aspx?DocRefId=%7b6057D98B-0000-C912-
9B64-A2D769C4790D%7d
8

VDER and receiving compensation from the tariff. For example, a rideshare fleet by the company
Revel has operated a V2G site since 2022 enrolled in VDER and receiving retail compensation for
participation in the tariff.15 In the multiple years that VDER has been actively offered to V2G
customers, issues surrounding federal jurisdiction or resource eligibility for retail export
compensation tariffs have not been raised.
C. The Commission has previously adopted and authorized significant ratepayer
investment in non-NEM, non-QF export compensation initiatives.
The clear and repeatedly upheld precedent established by the NY PSC shows that state
utility commissions can establish mass-market, tariffed export rates for non-NEM, non-QF
resources. This Commission itself has also adopted and authorized significant ratepayer
investment in these types of export compensation initiatives, including the following California
IOU efforts that allow exports from EVs:
• PG&E has current Vehicle-to-Everything (“V2X”) pilots, which encourages EVs to export
under the utility’s Hourly Flex Pricing (“HFP”) signal, which uses the same price engine
and API as PG&E’s expanded dynamic rate pilot authorized in this proceeding.16
• SDG&E allows EVs and other customer DERs to export in its Dynamic Export Rate Pilot,
which sends price signals based on the CAISO day-ahead price and a generation capacity
component.17
15 SEPA, Case Study: Revel Rideshare— Commercial Fleet V2G & Demand Response, September 2023:
https://s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/fonteva-customer-
media/00Do0000000Yi66EAC/jPnGYohk_SEPA_Case_Study_Revel_Rideshare_State_of_Bidirectional
_Charging_pdf
16 PG&E’s V2X were approved by the Commission in Resolution E-5192 pursuant to D.20-12-029.
17 SDG&E’s Dynamic Export Rate Pilot was approved in D.23-11- 006.
9

• Southern California Edison (“SCE”) has proposed a new EV export rate, their Vehicle Grid
Resource Proposal (“VGRP”), which would provide export compensation for EVs.18
Based on VGIC’s detailed engagement in the development of all three of these options since the
beginning of each effort, none of these pilots or proposals have been held up or opposed on the
basis of potential overlap or complexities with wholesale market operations, rules, or participation.
D. The Commission-adopted Demand Flexibility Design Principles include offering
dynamic export compensation to all export-capable DERs.
In D.23-04-040, the Commission adopted Demand Flexibility Design Principles, including
Demand Flexibility Design Principle 6: “Demand flexibility tariffs should provide marginal
cost-based compensation for exports to enable economically efficient grid integration of
customer-sited electrification technologies and distributed energy resources.”19 This principle
was adopted because the Commission recognized that “Customer exports should be compensated
commensurate to the real-time value that those exports provide the grid.”20 and noted that “This
will create a stable pathway for customers to adopt export-capable DERs and electrification
technologies (e.g., bidirectional electric vehicle chargers) without creating cost-shifts for other
customers.”21 At the time the principles were developed, there were discussions about what would
be an appropriate dynamic export compensation rate, but no party opposed the principle that an
export compensation rate should be offered. In fact, the offering of a technology-neutral export
rate was supported by multiple parties, including the California Environmental Justice Alliance
18 VGRP is currently being taken up in A.24-03-019.
19 D.23-04-040 at 34.
20 D.23-04-040 at 33.
21 D.23-04-040 at 33.
10

(“CEJA”),22 California Energy Storage Alliance (“CESA”),23 Center for Accessible Technology
(“CforAT”),24 Enchanted Rock,25 350 Bay Area and The Climate Center,26 and SCE.27
These Demand Flexibility Design Principles were used to guide parties’ dynamic rate
proposals and responses to those proposals, and should be used to direct the Commission’s
guidance in this PD. It is not appropriate at this time for the Commission to adopt guidance that
goes against earlier Commission orders. VGIC respectfully questions the fundamental value of the
Demand Flexibility Design Principles decision if the subsequent guidelines detailed in this PD
represent such a significant departure from the adopted design principles. In line with the
Commission-adopted principle, this PD should direct the IOUs to adopt export compensation that
is marginal and cost-based for all DERs that are capable of providing exports.With this in mind,
VGIC recommends the following Finding of Fact be added to the PD:
It is reasonable for the Large IOUs to include marginal, cost-based export compensation in
DF Rate Proposals.
III. THE COMMISSION SHOULD CONSIDER ALTERNATIVE PROGRAMATIC
STRUCTURES TO UNLOCK DISTRIBUTION VALUE.
VGIC understands the desire to unlock the distribution value that can be provided by DERs
to avoid unnecessary distribution upgrades, as distribution costs are expected to increase
significantly in the coming years. The 2023 Kevala Electrification Impacts Study Part 1 (“EIS Part
1”) estimates that distribution system investment from electrification will amount to $51 billion
22 CEJA Opening Comments on Phase 1 Scoping Memo at 12.
23 CESA Opening Comments on Phase 1 Scoping Memo at 1.
24 CforAT Opening Comments on Phase 1 Scoping Memo at 14.
25 Enchanted Rock Opening Comments on Phase 1 Scoping Memo at 5.
26 350 Bay Area and The Climate Center Opening Comments on Phase 1 Scoping Memo at 8.
27 SCE Opening Comments on Phase 1 Scoping Memo at 10.
11

by 2035.28 On the other hand, Cal Advocates’ recent Distribution Grid Electrification Model
(“DGEM”) study and report indicates that through load management, including primarily EV load
management, this value can be reduced to $22.7 billion.29 These savings underscore the importance
of deploying the most effective strategies to optimize use of the existing distribution system and
avoid or defer costly upgrades.
At the same time, using circuit-specific and highly localized pricing, even if circuits are
clustered, raises geographic equity and fairness concerns. Because different customers would face
different price signals based on their circuit conditions, customers could face systematically higher
or lower distribution costs compared to other customers. As discussed by the PD, “If constrained
areas of the distribution grid are located in low-income or disadvantaged communities, where cost
of service is higher, this could raise concerns regarding the equity in differential pricing.”30 These
impacts could result in uneven access to cost savings opportunities, and given these concerns, it is
unclear whether dynamic distribution pricing is the best way to unlock distribution value.
Programmatic approaches have also been proven to unlock distribution value, particularly
for EV customers, and should be considered as alternative approach. In these programs, third-party
aggregators enroll EV charging customers in the utility distribution programs and integrate with
the utility’s operations to respond to real-time distribution conditions. Such programs can “even
out” load across targeted time periods, prevent overload on distribution equipment, and create
additional headroom on constrained substations, without imposing circuit-specific price
28 Kevala, Electrification Impacts Study Part 1: Bottom-Up Load Forecasting and System-Level
Electrification Impacts Cost Estimates, May 9, 2023.
29 Cal Advocates, DGEM 2.0 Preliminary Results, October 21, 2024,
https://www.publicadvocates.cpuc.ca.gov/-/media/cal-advocates-website/files/press-room/reports-and-
analyses/241024-public-advocates-office-dgem-20-preliminary-results.pdf
30 PD at 45.
12

disparities. They typically provide predictable payments to customers for performance, with fixed
monthly compensation for participation or payment for performance in events. As these programs
also typically span much larger areas, such as entire substations, cities, or utility areas, a wide
variety of customers have access to the same payment amounts, instead of significantly
advantaging or disadvantaging customers on constrained or unconstrained circuits.
These managed charging programs have shown significant success in providing
distribution value. Baltimore General Electric (“BGE”) ran a successful Smart Charge
Management (SCM) Demonstration program that specifically targeted optimizing distribution
usage. The program significantly reduced non-coincident peaking by 33% on individual feeders.31
This was done by orchestrating EV charging in a particular area, prioritizing customer charging
based on customer departure times and EV battery state of charge. SCE has also requested approval
for their Orchestrated Charging and Advanced Resiliency for Distribution (“ORCHARD”)
Program, which will allow SCE to utilize a centralized managed charging to unlock distribution
value.32
VGIC recommends that the Commission allow this programmatic structure to be used as
the dynamic distribution component, at least for EV customers. Under this approach, customers
could still receive a dynamic price signal to benefit system and transmission conditions, but the
EV distribution load management program would support local distribution system capacity.
IV. THE COMMISSION SHOULD ALLOW FOR FLEXIBILITY IN CUSTOMER
PROTECTION MEASURES.
31 SEPA, The State of Managed Charging in 2024 at p.43: https://sepapower.org/resource/state-of-
managed-charging-in-2024/
32 SCE Advice Letter 5536-E.
13

In the PD, the Commission adopts requirements that the IOUs offer consumer protection
measures to reduce customer bill volatility and the risk of customers being exposed to
unexpectedly high rates for extended periods of time. The options the Commission provides in its
proposed guidance are two-part subscription tariffs, approaches similar to Valley Clean Energy’s
price-adjustment, transactive pricing options, and bill limiters or bill protection.
Customer protection measures are important to ensure that participants in dynamic rates
are not exposed to unreasonable or unpredictable bill impacts. However, if these measures overly
shield customers from real-time price fluctuations, they can significantly weaken the very price
signals needed to encourage load shifting and grid-responsive behavior. As discussed in the Final
Evaluation Report for SCE’s Dynamic Rate Pilot, high dynamic prices did not drive significant
load shifting, which could be due in part to the subscription pricing muting the bill impact of load
shifting. As discussed in the report, “The evaluation of cost recovery concluded that the customer’s
subscription load profiles were the most important factor in determining whether a customer was
due a shadow bill credit.”33 Although shadow billing also played a part to mute price signals, the
pilot shows the outcome when customers are insufficiently incentivized to respond to signals.
Because the initial implementation of dynamic rates will be optional, participants are more
likely to be engaged and responsive if given the opportunity to manage greater portions of their
load under true dynamic price exposure. For large customers, the PD already allows negotiated
subscription levels below 100% of historical load, providing an incentive to respond to price
signals for the unsubscribed portion of their usage. VGIC recommends extending similar flexibility
to small customers by allowing them to opt into subscription levels lower than their Tier 1 usage
allowance or “pay-for-your-load-shape” baseline. This would enable small customers to see more
33 Final Evaluation of Southern California Edison’s Dynamic Rate Pilot at 8.
14

of the dynamic rate’s price variation, respond accordingly, and contribute meaningfully to grid
needs.
Additionally, the Commission should direct the IOUs to ensure that subscriptions are easy
to understand and are predictable for customers. Under current subscription models being used in
dynamic rate pilots, it can be hard to understand what the subscription baseline is and how it will
change over time. This issue is most prevalent when subscription baselines are finalized ex post,
after a billing period has already occurred. However, even if subscription baselines are determined
ex ante, it can be hard to predict exactly what they will be, especially if the subscription is based
on an individual customer’s usage from the past 12 months. Additionally, the utilities could be
incentivized to increase subscription levels where possible to ensure additional cost recovery for
non-marginal costs. To ensure that appropriate and transparent subscriptions are created, VGIC
strongly recommends this PD direct the IOUs to make clear in their dynamic rate
applications how the subscription component will be implemented, including the frequency
and method of updating the subscription, strategies for communicating subscription curves
to customers, and how subscription data will be accessible to customers and load flexibility
service providers.
V. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit these opening comments on the Proposed
Decision.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: August 14, 2025
15