DOCKETED
Docket Number: 25-IEPR-06
Project Title: Accelerating Interconnection and Energization
TN #: 265777
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC) Comment - IEPR
Document Title: Commissioner Workshop on Accelerating Interconnection and
Energization
Description: N/A
Filer: System
Organization: Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
Submitter Role: Public
Submission Date: 8/25/2025 4:40:17 PM
Docketed Date: 8/25/2025

Comment Received From: Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
Submitted On: 8/25/2025
Docket Number: 25-IEPR-06
VGIC Comments on IEPR Commissioner Workshop on Accelerating
Interconnection and Energization
Additional submitted attachment is included below.

August 25, 2025
Email to: docket@energy.ca.gov
Docket Number: 25-IEPR-06
Subject: 2025 Integrated Energy Policy Report
RE: Comments of the Vehicle Grid Integration Council on the IEPR Commissioner
Workshop on Accelerating Interconnection and Energization
Dear Sir or Madam:
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC) appreciates the opportunity to provide comments
on the Integrated Energy Policy Report (IEPR) Commissioner Workshop on Accelerating
Interconnection and Energization hosted August 11, 2025.
While California has made significant progress in expanding electric vehicle (EV) adoption and
distributed energy deployment, delays and inefficiencies in these processes risk undermining
customer adoption, slowing innovation, and increasing costs for ratepayers. The 2025 IEPR should
highlight these challenges and identify forward-looking solutions that will allow California to
capture the full reliability, affordability, and decarbonization benefits of EVs. In particular VGIC
recommends that the IEPR discuss barriers to bidirectional EV interconnection and flexible service
connections.
California should prioritize streamlining interconnection for grid-parallel bidirectional EV
chargers.
Distributed resources can and will play an important role in California’s grid future; in particular,
there will be millions of EVs on the road that could provide electric system capacity, both in load
flexibility but also for exports for the grid. However, today’s interconnection process for
bidirectional chargers remains complex and costly, creating a major barrier to widespread
deployment. The 2025 IEPR should discuss current barriers to bidirectional interconnection and
potential solutions to ensure we do not stall the state’s electrification and reliability objectives.
Current interconnection processes often fail to recognize bidirectional charging configurations
clearly, impose disproportionate fees on small projects, and require duplicative steps. VGIC
therefore recommends the following:
• Ensure customers/installers interconnecting bidirectional EV charging systems for
grid-parallel operation are provided the appropriate guidance, portals, and forms:
To avoid confusion and delay, it is critical that each utility’s interconnection application
forms and online portal, if available, allow applicants to clearly identify whether they are
1

interconnecting a grid-parallel bidirectional EV charging system. In the past, grid-parallel
bidirectional charging sites have been significantly delayed because applicants were not
provided with appropriate forms and, in turn, projects would be initially routed through the
wrong process and utility team. Applicants should be able to clearly specify the technology
type, AC or DC paired, as it can expedite utility review.
Notably, Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E) has made and maintained this update to its
forms, which demonstrates that such updates are feasible and effective.1 In contrast,
Southern California Edison (SCE) and San Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E) have not
implemented similar updates, which VGIC members report resulting in confusion and
delays.2
• Reassess interconnection application fees for grid-parallel bidirectional charging
systems: California has interconnection application fees for grid-parallel bidirectional EV
charging systems that significantly exceed those charged by utilities in other states. The
investor-owned utilities charge an $800 fee for all grid-parallel bidirectional EV charging
systems less than 1 MW,3 and Sacramento Municipal Utility District (SMUD) charges
$475 for residential systems < 10 kW and $900 for systems between 10-20 kW, the size of
most bidirectional EV chargers on the market today.4
These fees have an outsized impact on bidirectional EV charging systems, which have
relatively lower upfront costs compared to stationary energy storage systems, rooftop solar
PV, or other customer distributed energy resources (DERs). For example, the most
significant share of the total upfront costs for a stationary battery energy storage system is
the battery itself. In contrast, this is not one of the costs required in enabling a bidirectional
charging system, as the vehicle battery has already been purchased for its primary
transportation use case. As a result, the $800-$900 interconnection application fee
comprises one of the most significant upfront costs for grid-parallel bidirectional EV
charging systems and, in turn, one of the largest barriers to widespread vehicle-to-grid
capacity.
• Define a timeline or roadmap for transitioning to virtual inspection and notification-
only approaches: Virtual inspections and notification-only approaches both offer cost and
time improvements over traditional site inspection processes, especially for smaller
1 PG&E Electric Form No. 79-1174-03. Attachment H. Section AB.
https://www.pge.com/tariffs/assets/pdf/tariffbook/ELEC_FORMS_79-1174-03H.pdf
2 See SCE Electric Form 14-918. Question 3.b.
https://www.sce.com/sites/default/files/customfiles/PDF_Files/ELECTRIC_FORM_14-918_PDF fillable.pdf and
SDG&E Electric Form 142-05201 and SDG&E Electric Form 142-05201
https://tariffsprd.sdge.com/view/tariff/?utilId=SDGE&bookId=ELEC&tarfKey=730
3 https://www.cpuc.ca.gov/rule21/
4 https://www.smud.org/-/media/Documents/Rate-Information/Rates/Rule-2-21.ashx
2

bidirectional EV charging system projects. Establishing a clear timeline and milestones for
this transition will streamline interconnection processes and reduce burdens on applicants.
• Consider accepting all reasonable certification pathways for emerging V2G AC
equipment: Currently, V2G AC interconnection is only allowed under the three large
IOUs’ V2G AC interconnection pilot and has not been incorporated into the IOUs’ Rule
21 on a permanent basis, nor, based on VGIC’s understanding, have any publicly-owned
utilities or small and multi-jurisdictional IOUs detailed a pathway for V2G AC
interconnection. VGIC believes V2G AC interconnection should be unlocked by allowing
multiple eligible interconnection pathways.
Stakeholders should consider the merits of establishing multiple pathways within Rule 21,
as well as the publicly-owned utilities interconnection processes, for enabling V2G AC
interconnection. UL 1741 SC, a new standard in development for V2G AC equipment, and
UL 1741 CRD for DER Systems, a new CRD in development for V2G AC equipment, are
both designed to meet the critical underlying safety and grid interoperability requirements
of the grid. The UL 1741 CRD for DER Systems is for “matched pair” certification of a
given EVSE paired with a specific vendor EV for V2G AC operation, whereas the UL 1741
SC certification is for general use with any EV designed to SAE J3072. There is also a
certification pathway for “matched pair” V2G AC using UL 9741 for grid-tied AC power
export. The UL 9741 certification pathway, however, is not referenced in Rule 21, hence
the desire to establish the UL 1741 CRD alternative certification pathway.
Given the relatively nascent stage of the market, VGIC recommends considering allowing
customers to elect the interconnection pathways best suited for them and their choice of
technology. Notably, Maryland has already established a dual pathway approach, and other
markets, including Texas and Nevada, are faced with a timely opportunity to follow suit.
VGIC urges the Commission to advise relevant stakeholders via the IEPR to avoid creating
undue limitations at this stage. A robust stakeholder process should consider all reasonable
certification pathways.
California should set clear timelines for adopting these improvements and ensuring consistency
across all utilities. Doing so will help unlock the hundreds of megawatts of latent capacity
already on California’s roads and ensure that EVs are fully integrated into the state’s clean
energy transition.
Flexible service connection can help improve energization timelines and also help to
maximize use of the distribution system.
During the workshop, the CPUC discussed their efforts to implement flexible service connections,
where customers must adhere to load limits during certain times of the day/year when the
3

distribution infrastructure is constrained. This is an extremely valuable tool to enable quicker
energization but also to enable long-term cost savings for ratepayers. The IEPR should further
explore flexible service connection and how to unlock this pathway throughout the state, including
in publicly owned utility service territories.
EV customers have shown a particular interest in flexible service connections, since many larger
charging sites for public fast charging and fleet charging have faced years of delays to unlock 24/7
import capability for their full charging load. This is materially impacting the ability of
Californians to electrify their vehicles and business fleets. However, many of these sites may wish
to avoid charging during times when the distribution system is constrained if it means that, in
exchange for this load management, they can connect to the grid sooner. This can be done on an
interim basis while electric infrastructure upgrades are constructed, but it is also likely that
customers could continue to follow these schedules, avoiding the need for upgrades altogether. In
either case, VGIC recommends that the customers electing the relevant load management
technologies to enable flexible service connection, which may include software subscriptions and
licenses, hardware, energy storage systems, local generation, and other costly solutions, be
provided with a share of the avoided upgrade costs. VGIC believes a shared savings model in
which utilities, ratepayers, and the customer electing the enabling solution for flexible service
connection should all see clear financial benefit, representing a win-win-win solution to advance
electrification while triggering fewer overall distribution system upgrades borne by utility
ratepayers. We discuss the shared savings model in further detail below, as well as other specific
recommendations related to flexible service connection.
• All California utilities should adopt at a minimum, static, firm flexible service
connection offerings for EV customers that cannot be fully energized in a timely
manner. PG&E and SCE have shown that simple flexible service connection frameworks
can be created with significant customer participation. These structures should be expanded
to other utilities, including publicly owned utilities, to allow customers to electrify their
vehicles and fleets more quickly. Additionally, utilities should consider how to offer more
dynamic flexible service connection offerings, especially if they have existing capabilities
and investments required to enable these solutions (e.g., utility DERMS platforms).
• Critically, all flexible service connection offerings should not only be technically
available, but easily accessible to all customers through a standardized process, form,
tariff, and/or portal. This will allow for the rapid scale-up of flexible service connections
in pursuit of both California’s transportation decarbonization goals and the state’s urgent
affordability needs.
• California should allow customers to voluntarily adopt flexible service connections
and be compensated for the commensurate deferral and/or avoidance of costly
distribution infrastructure upgrades. Flexible service connections present a critical
4

opportunity to reduce total distribution system costs by “locking in” customer-side
flexibility during the upgrade or new load site design and construction phase. In cases
where upgrades will inevitably be needed to enable widespread electrification, the value of
deferral alone is significant given the time value of money and the long timelines for utility-
side upgrades.
VGIC strongly urges California to adopt fair, transparent, and scalable approaches for
compensation that reflects this value of avoided system costs. One such approach is a
shared savings model, where customers receive a portion of the distribution upgrade
deferral value that they unlock. In this approach, the avoided costs can be split between the
customer paying the equipment and/or software cost to enable the deferral/avoidance, the
ratepayers that would otherwise have borne the cost of the upgrade, and the utility. Another
approach that could be used is designating a fund to support customer installation of
equipment and/or software required to enable elective flexible service connections. Under
this approach, the total amount of funding provided to offset the equipment and/or software
costs is below the total deferred/avoided costs, such that the program yields clear net
benefits for ratepayers. For example, New York has established its Load Management
Technology Incentive Program, which provides funding to augment other incentive
programs, like the EV make-ready program, ensuring adequate funding to deploy
equipment enabling flexible service connections.
Overall, flexible service connections should be pursued by all California energy agencies. As
discussed at the workshop, incentivizing the technology-enabled rightsizing of load requests to
existing grid capacity should remain a priority moving forward.
Conclusion.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments and looks forward to collaborating
with the CEC and other stakeholders in this docket.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
Vehicle Grid Integration Council
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
5