December 05, 2025
The Honorable Gavin Newsom, Governor
State of California
1021 O Street, Suite 9000
Sacramento, CA 95814
RE: Stabilize and Strengthen California’s Zero-Emission Future through Near- and
Long-Term GGRF Investments
Dear Governor Newsom:
California’s clean transportation leadership has been defined by its willingness to innovate, invest, and
stay the course. We thank the Legislature and the Administration for reauthorizing the state’s Cap-and-
Invest program and restoring stability to the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund (GGRF). Existing and future
GGRF funds are the central tool for a better-managed, more affordable clean transportation transition that
delivers rapid improvements in air quality and reduces GHG emissions.
Data from the California Air Resources Board (CARB) shows 90 percent of all Californians breathe
unhealthy levels of air pollution each year,1 with transportation and transportation fuels production
producing roughly 80 percent of nitrogen oxide pollution, 90 percent of diesel particulate matter pollution,2
and nearly half of all statewide greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.3 This pollution is estimated to result in
thousands of excess premature deaths, hospitalizations, and asthma attacks every year.
ZEV incentive programs have created over 200,000 clean transportation jobs and attracted over 60 ZEV and
ZEV-related firms to invest in and base their operations here in California. These economic impacts are
complemented by the widespread success that such incentive programs have had in encouraging the
1 California Air Resources Board, “Health & Air Pollution.”
2 California Energy Commission, “Transforming Transportation.”
3 California Air Resources Board, “California Greenhouse Gas Emissions from 2000 to 2021: Trends of Emissions and
Other Indicators.”

Honorable Gavin Newsom
Re: Stabilize and Strengthen California’s Zero-Emission Future through Near- and Long-Term GGRF Investments
December 05, 2025
Page 2 of 5
adoption of cleaner vehicles, helping to put nearly 2.5 million passenger ZEVs 4and over 27,000 zero-
emission medium- and heavy-duty trucks on our roads 5 – the largest ZEV fleet in the nation. These
successes have helped to reduce transportation-related GHG emissions by approximately 14 percent
since 2017, as more residents and businesses gain access to ZEVs.6
CARB’s analysis indicates that sustained public-interest investment is essential to maintain market
momentum and continue attracting private capital. Across its portfolio of programs, CARB estimates that
approximately $1.5 billion in incentive funding will be required annually for at least the next five years to
keep California on track. The industry agrees: this is the level of needed investment to scale ZEV
deployment to meet state climate, air-quality, and economic-competitiveness goals. 7
Yet today, the ZEV market faces significant uncertainty. The expiration of the federal EV tax credit, the
easing of national air-quality and fuel-economy standards, and challenges to state authority are chilling
private investment and softening consumer demand. Automakers have paused or canceled EV models,
major facilities have announced layoffs, and confidence in the market has weakened. California cannot
afford to let its ZEV market—and the jobs, innovation, and community benefits it delivers—lose
momentum.
Even in the face of budget constraints, now is the time to stabilize the market and modernize the GGRF
framework, sending a clear long-term signal that California, the birthplace of ZEV innovation, remains
committed to zero-emission transportation. Recognizing that current GGRF revenues cannot meet the full
$1.5 billion need today, we also urge the state to explore bold, sustainable revenue options to support
required investment levels as the program grows.
In this budget, the $775 million investment represents a meaningful commitment to maintaining program
continuity and preventing backsliding—while establishing a path to reach the full $1.5 billion annual need
as GGRF revenues increase. The industry recommends allocating these funds across five core investment
areas:
Medium- and Heavy-Duty Vehicles – $365 million
Support for the continued deployment of zero-emission trucks, buses, school buses, drayage, and off-
road/port equipment across California’s economy. This investment maintains momentum in the state’s
highest-polluting sectors, protects critical clean-manufacturing and maintenance jobs, and keeps
California competitive as global markets accelerate ZEV freight production. Funding would allow for the
continuation of proven CARB programs, including the Hybrid and Zero-Emission Truck and Bus Voucher
Incentive Project (HVIP)—covering both standard and transit HVIP—the Zero-Emission School Bus and
Infrastructure Program (ZESBI), the Clean Off-Road Equipment Voucher Incentive Project (CORE), and the
emerging Zero-Emission Ports (ZE Ports) program.
4 California Energy Commission, “New ZEV Sales in California.”
5 California Air Resources Board, “1 in 6 new trucks, buses, and vans in California are zero-emission.”
6 California Air Resources Board, “California Greenhouse Gas Emissions from 2000 to 2021: Trends of Emissions and
Other Indicators.”
7 California Air Resources Board, “Drive Forward Incentives Public Workshop”, November 13, 2025

Honorable Gavin Newsom
Re: Stabilize and Strengthen California’s Zero-Emission Future through Near- and Long-Term GGRF Investments
December 05, 2025
Page 3 of 5
Light-Duty Vehicles Incentives – $200 million
Consumer-focused rebates that reach car-buyers across the market to defray the loss of federal credits,
sustain consumer demand, and expand access to affordable ZEVs statewide. These incentives drive
volume in the new and emerging used-EV market, reduce household transportation costs, and keep
momentum in a sector facing production slowdowns and model withdrawals at a time when adoption is
approaching a tipping point.8
Clean Vehicle Infrastructure, All Duty Levels – $135 million
Funding should be directed to the CEC’s Clean Transportation Program to strategically deploy charging
and refueling infrastructure across light-, medium-, and heavy-duty sectors in direct coordination with
CARB’s vehicle investment needs and the CEC’s market analysis. This would build on proven programs
such as CALeVIP and EnergIIZE Commercial Vehicles to expand public, multi-family, workplace, depot,
and port-power infrastructure in ways that accelerate fleet transition, avoid stranded assets, strengthen
utility planning for large load centers, improve reliability and coverage, and ensure California’s
infrastructure network keeps pace with rapid ZEV deployment. There are limited sources of medium- and
heavy-duty ZEV infrastructure funding outside of the CEC’s Clean Transportation Program.
Community-Based and Equity Mobility Programs – $75 million
Funding for neighborhood-scale mobility projects and clean-transportation access in disadvantaged and
underserved communities through CARB’s Clean Cars 4 All, Driving Clean Assistance Program (DCAP),
Sustainable Communities, and Clean Mobility Programs. These investments provide tangible local
benefits—such as electric car-share, micro-transit, and e-bike access—while helping households replace
the oldest, most polluting vehicles and improving transportation affordability in communities that bear the
greatest health burden from fossil-fuel emissions.
Coupled with multi-year GGRF commitments outlined in SB 840 (Limon, 2025), this approach provides a
clear path to a better-managed and more affordable clean transportation transition.
Sincerely,
Matthew E. Chen John J. Doherty
External Affairs Manager, North America Secretary/Treasurer
ABB E-Mobility California State Association of Electrical
Workers
Laura Renger
Executive Director Darryl Little, Jr.
California Electric Transportation Coalition State Policy Director
CALSTART
8 The Clean Vehicle Rebate Project (CVRP), which was funded at approximately $200 million per year from 2017
onwards, provided cost-effective equity benefits at scale, despite being a mass market program. In the last year of
the program, CVRP provided an estimated $174 million (approximately 60% of annual funding) to approximately
47,000 individuals with household incomes below $100,000.9
9 Williams, B. D. H. (2025, Apr.). “Assessing Progress Toward Equitable Access to EVs with Incentive Program Metrics:
Lessons Learned from CVRP and NY DCRP Using Program Data and Baselines of Comparison”. CARB 2025 Clean
Transportation Equity Incentives Symposium. http://dx.doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.15850.22724.

Honorable Gavin Newsom
Re: Stabilize and Strengthen California’s Zero-Emission Future through Near- and Long-Term GGRF Investments
December 05, 2025
Page 4 of 5
Rocky Fernandez Robert Teffeteller
Senior Director, Policy Vehicle Incentives & Policy Specialist
Center for Sustainable Energy Motiv Electric Trucks
Simon Ouellette Mario Cordero
CEO CEO
ChargeHub Port of Long Beach
Reed Addis Artie Mandel
Government Affairs Director of Government Affairs
Electric Vehicle Charing Association Port of Los Angeles
Jamie Hall Dave Rubin
Senior Director, External Affairs Head of Policy
EV Realty Proterra Inc.
Kevin Wikholm Frank Giradot
Director of Site Development & Funding Senior Director, Communications
EVCS – Arcadia, CA RIDE
Bruce Pflaum Julia Rege
Founder & CEO General Manager, Environment Regulation &
Gateway Fleets Research
Toyota Motor North America
Andrea Pratt
VP Government & Utilities Relations Zach Woogen
Greenlane Infrastructure Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
Andrea Marpillero-Colomina
Policy, Research & Data Analytics Advisor Michael A. Smith
GreenLatinos Vice President, Implementation & Partner Strategy
Xeal
Olabisi Boyle
Sr. Vice President, Product Planning & Mobility Margaret Boelter
Strategy Policy
Hyundai Motor North America Zeem Solutions
cc:
Honorable Monique Limón, President pro Tem; California State Senate
mariana.sabeniano@sen.ca.gov; samantha.omana@sen.ca.gov
Honorable Brian Jones, Republican Leader; California State Senate
craig.wilson@sen.ca.gov; jake.donahue@sen.ca.gov

Honorable Gavin Newsom
Re: Stabilize and Strengthen California’s Zero-Emission Future through Near- and Long-Term GGRF Investments
December 05, 2025
Page 5 of 5
Honorable Robert Rivas, Speaker; California State Assembly
steve.omara@asm.ca.gov; jason.sisney@asm.ca.gov; myesha.jackson@asm.ca.gov
Honorable Heath Flora, Republican Leader; California State Assembly
Vice Chair, Assembly Committee on Budget
dylan.gray@asm.ca.gov; joe.shinstock@asm.ca.gov
Honorable Scott Wiener, Chair; Senate Committee on Budget & Fiscal Review
Elisa Wynne, Staff Director; Senate Committee on Budget & Fiscal Review; elisa.wynne@sen.ca.gov
Eunice Roh, Consultant; Senate Committee on Budget & Fiscal Review; eunice.roh@sen.ca.gov
Honorable Roger Niello, Vice-Chair; Senate Committee on Budget & Fiscal Review;
calvin.rusch@sen.ca.gov
Kirk Feely, Fiscal Director; Senate Republican Caucus; kirk.feely@sen.ca.gov
Honorable Jesse Gabriel, Chair, Assembly Committee on Budget
Christian.Griffith@asm.ca.gov; Shy.Forbes@asm.ca.gov