July 7, 2025
Hon. Michelle L. Phillips
Secretary
New York Public Service Commission
3 Empire State Plaza
Albany, NY 12223-1350
RE: Case 18-E-0138: Proceeding on Motion of the Commission Regarding Electric Vehicle
Supply Equipment and Infrastructure
Comments of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
on Joint Utilities’ Petition to Extend the Managed Charging Programs
I. Introduction
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC) is a 501(c)(6) membership-based trade
association committed to advancing vehicle-grid integration (VGI) through policy development,
education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports the transition to decarbonized transportation
and electric sectors by ensuring the value from flexible EV charging and discharging is
recognized and compensated in support of a more reliable, affordable, and efficient electric grid.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide comments to the Public Service Commission (PSC)
in response to the Joint Utilities’ Petition to Extend the Managed Charging Programs, filed on
April 9, 2025. In the below comments, VGIC expresses its support for the petition, and provides
additional overarching feedback on no-regrets steps to better leverage EVs for the benefit of
ratepayers and New York’s broader state policy goals. Our comments are organized as follows:
● General support for the Joint Utilities’ petition
● The need to include consideration of technological advancements in managed
charging, including active managed charging and bidirectional charging systems,
within the process to reauthorize the Programs beyond 2026
II. VGIC Supports the Joint Utilities’ Request to Continue the Existing Program
Implementation.
Overall, VGIC is encouraged by the high participation numbers in the utilities’ managed
charging programs. Experimenting with different program structures has helped generate lessons
1

learned and best practices to help inform New York’s transportation electrification strategy going
forward. We believe the Joint Utilities’ request to reauthorize the existing managed charging
programs and the specific requested budget transfer for O&R’s program are reasonable, no-
regrets actions the Commission should take to avoid disruption to program enrollment. Program
continuity is critical to ensuring the success of these programs.
III. VGIC Supports the Joint Utilities’ Request to Initiate a Managed Charging
Program Reauthorization Process After New MCIPs Are Filed by January 30, 2026,
But Recommends Scoping Consideration of Key Technological Advancements.
In its petition, the Joint Utilities recommend that the Commission initiate a process to
reauthorize the Programs in 2026. VGIC strongly supports this recommendation, but offers a
critical enhancement to ensure the programs are well aligned with the state of the industry,
available technology, customer interests, and New York’s state goals: VGIC urges the
Commission to scope active managed charging and bidirectional charging systems into the
consideration of the Programs in 2026.
The utilities’ Programs are largely focused on passive managed charging, rather than
active managed charging. While participation is encouraging, the Joint Utilities’ own data show
that off-peak charging performance varies widely from 62 percent at Con Edison to 93 percent at
Central Hudson.1 In peer programs that use active managed-charging, off-peak shares are often
at 90 percent or higher.2 These results suggest New York is leaving significant load-shifting
value on the table and would benefit from a measured expansion of active managed-charging
functionality as part of the forthcoming re-authorization. As a result, VGIC respectfully urges
the Commission to ensure active managed charging is a focal point for the consideration of
the Programs in 2026 and, if possible, provide related guidance to the Joint Utilities prior to
the January 30, 2026 MCIP filings.
The July 14, 2022 Commission Order Approving Managed Charging Programs with
Modifications was primarily focused on unidirectional smart charging technologies. The focus on
unidirectional charging was reasonable at the time, given the lack of bidirectional charging
solutions available to residential customers. However, over the past three years, the industry has
made substantial steps forward in commercializing, marketing, and installing bidirectional
charging equipment. Currently, bidirectional charging equipment is advertised to customers of
the Ford F-150 Lightning Electric, nearly every GM electric vehicle, the Tesla Cybertruck, the
Kia EV9, and the Nissan LEAF. Additional product announcements have been made by
1 Case 18-E-0138. Petition of the Joint Utilities to Extend Residential Managed Charging Programs. Page 8.
2 https://www.ev.energy/blog/dynamic-pricing-outperforms-time-of-use-in-california-ev-charging-pilot-with-98-
energy-delivered-off-peak
2

Volkswagen, Volvo, Hyundai, Polestar, BMW, Mercedes-Benz, Stellantis, and Rivian. On the
charging manufacturer side, products from Ford/Sunrun, GM, Wallbox, dcbel, Emporia,
ChargePoint, Enphase, SolarEdge, and Autel have either been released or announced.
Meanwhile, the grid benefits that EVs can provide via unidirectional managed charging
programs could be substantially augmented through strategic implementation of bidirectional
charging systems. Bidirectional charging can serve as a valuable grid resource that provides
generation capacity in critical downstate areas (such as NYISO zones J and K) where new
transmission and generation is difficult to site. As EV adoption continues to increase in the Joint
Utilities’ service territory, bidirectional charging could become a critical tool to aid with summer
reliability needs as New York seeks to phase out fossil generation in these constrained areas.
Additionally, bidirectional capability unlocks new value propositions to customers, such as
backup power in the event of an outage, that managed charging alone cannot provide.
The Programs currently implemented do not adequately address these possibilities. With
this in mind, VGIC strongly recommends that the Commission explicitly scope
consideration of bidirectional charging systems into a forthcoming reauthorization process
and, if possible, provide related guidance to the Joint Utilities prior to the January 30, 2026
MCIP filings. Notably, VGIC has been an active participant in the recent development of
bidirectional charging programs in Massachusetts, California, and Maryland, and would be eager
to share lessons learned from these experiences to ensure New York maintains its position as an
innovative, future-oriented state.
IV. Conclusion
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments and looks forward to
working with the Joint Utilities, the Commission, Department of Public Service staff, and other
stakeholders to ensure the success of New York’s transportation electrification and grid
decarbonization efforts.
Respectfully submitted,
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
3