D.P.U. 24-196: Comments of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
on February 5, 2025 EV Infrastructure Program Hearing
I. Introduction
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)1 is a 501(c)(6) membership-based trade
association committed to advancing the role of electric vehicles (EVs) and vehicle-grid
integration (VGI) through policy development, education, outreach, and research. VGIC supports
the transition to decarbonized transportation and electric sectors by ensuring the value from
flexible EV charging and discharging is recognized and compensated in support of a more
reliable, affordable, and efficient electric grid. VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide
comments to the Department of Public Utilities (DPU) on the February 5 2025 EV Infrastructure
Program Hearing.
II. Vehicle-to-Grid Bidirectional Charging Systems Provide Critical Benefits to
Massachusetts EDC Ratepayers.
a. Acceleration of Transportation Electrification
Vehicle-to-grid (“V2G”) bidirectional charging solutions can significantly
reduce the total cost of ownership for electric vehicles (EV), including both passenger
vehicles and EV fleets, by enabling participation in grid services programs. A
pertinent example is the Connected Solutions program, which offers incentives for
demand response participation. Such performance-based incentives can be key drivers
for fleets considering the transition to EVs.
b. Support for the Evolving Power Sector
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., BorgWarner, Fermata Energy,
Ford Motor Company, General Motors, Nissan North America, Bidirectional Energy, dcbel, Eaton, Emporia,
EnergyHub, ev.energy, Gravity, GridBeyond, GridWiz, Hyundai Cradle, Kaluza, Landis and Gyr, Mercedes-Benz,
Orange Charger, Peak Power, EDF Powerflex, Stellantis N.V., Sumitomo Electric, Sunrun, Tesla, The Mobility House,
Toyota Motors North America, WeaveGrid, Clean Power Alliance, Holy Cross Energy, Los Angeles Department of
Water and Power, and Sacramento Municipal Utility District. The views expressed in these comments are those of
VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all individual VGIC member companies or supporters.
(https://www.vgicouncil.org/).
1

V2G facilitates the integration of renewable energy sources by providing
necessary energy storage and grid services. By enabling bidirectional energy flow at
the grid edge, V2G can assist in balancing supply and demand, thereby enhancing
grid stability and accommodating higher penetrations of renewable energy.
c. Downward Pressure on Electric Utility Rates
Efficient utilization of existing infrastructure through V2G can alleviate
distribution congestion and defer the need for costly infrastructure upgrades.
Implementing V2G as a non-wires alternative (NWA) in areas with distribution
constraints can lead to more efficient grid operations and exert downward pressure on
utility rates. V2G resources can also offset the use of costly peaking capacity that
may otherwise be procured in the ISO-NE market.
d. Enhancement of Resilience
V2G technology can provide critical backup power during emergencies. For
instance, electric fleet vehicles equipped with V2G capabilities can supply electricity
to evacuation centers or other essential facilities during power outages, thereby
bolstering community resilience. On the residential side, passenger EVs can provide
home backup power to customers during planned or unplanned outages.
e. Fostering Economic Activity
Many of VGIC’s members and supporters have a presence in Massachusetts,
including offices, manufacturing facilities, dealerships, and/or technical personnel.
The advancement of V2G technology is poised to stimulate economic growth within
the Commonwealth by creating jobs and fostering innovation in both the clean energy
and transportation sectors.
III. Barriers to Widespread V2G Implementation Persist Despite Massachusetts’ Recent
Progress.
VGIC acknowledges the progress made in Massachusetts toward facilitating widespread
V2G. Notably, the Connected Solutions program provides performance-based compensation for
customers utilizing bidirectional charging systems, and interconnection with utility distribution
grids as a form of energy storage is permitted by EDCs, including an exemption from UL 1741 SB
for certain bidirectional charging equipment. Additionally, V2G equipment and software are
currently available from major school bus manufacturers and charging equipment providers,
2

including Fermata Energy, BorgWarner, The Mobility House, Tellus Power Green, InCharge,
Heliox, and Synop.
Despite these advancements, significant barriers persist that impede the widespread
adoption of V2G technology. Foremost among these is the substantial upfront cost associated with
deploying V2G bidirectional charging solutions compared to unidirectional charging systems.
Presently, existing energy storage technology deployment incentives do not recognize
bidirectional charging systems as eligible, and the current slate of utility EV programs lack
incremental incentives specific to this technology. This absence of financial support significantly
hinders market transition toward V2G bidirectional charging solutions, which may need this
support only while in the relatively early stages of market development.
To overcome these challenges, VGIC strongly recommends the implementation of targeted
upfront incentives to offset the initial costs of bidirectional charging infrastructure. Such incentives
are essential to accelerate market adoption and fully realize the potential benefits of V2G
technology within Massachusetts. VGIC respectfully urges the DPU to allow these incentives to
be claimed by projects that may claim other federal or state incentives for this technology, so as to
not preclude projects from successful implementation or overly restrict access to funding intended
to support market transition for the relatively nascent V2G space.
IV. VGIC Supports Eversource’s Proposed Incremental V2G Charger Incentive for
Electric School Bus Sites and Recommends Additional Actions for the EDCs to
Support V2G.
VGIC commends Eversource for its recognition of the value of V2G technology in
supporting electric school buses and strongly supports this element of its proposal. Establishing
incremental incentives for V2G bidirectional charging infrastructure at electric school bus
charging sites aligns with emerging national best practices, as seen in California and under early
consideration in other states like New York, Maryland, and Illinois.
To ensure that Massachusetts remains at the forefront of vehicle-grid integration, VGIC
urges the DPU to direct National Grid and Unitil to follow Eversource’s lead by offering
incrementally higher incentives for bidirectional charging equipment relative to unidirectional
charging systems. A consistent and equitable approach across all three investor-owned electric
distribution companies (EDCs) will be critical in fostering a robust and competitive market for
V2G solutions.
Further, while Eversource’s proposal focuses on the electric school bus sector, VGIC
strongly recommends that all three EDCs develop bidirectional charging incentives beyond this
3

single use case. Residential managed charging programs and medium- and heavy-duty fleet
applications other than electric school bus charging also stand to benefit from bidirectional
capabilities, delivering increased grid benefits, improved reliability, and cost savings for both
participants and non-participating ratepayers. Expanding the scope of V2G incentives will ensure
that Massachusetts fully leverages the potential of this technology across a broad set of use cases.
VGIC also urges the DPU to direct all EDCs to implement additional performance-based
programs and/or optional export compensation rates that are available to a broader set of
customers, including residential customers with V2G equipment. While programs such as
Connected Solutions have provided an important pathway for fleet and commercial V2G
participation, residential customers remain largely excluded from V2G compensation
opportunities. Ensuring that households with bidirectional EVs can access fair compensation for
grid exports will further support market growth and enhance grid flexibility.
Finally, VGIC reiterates its recommendation that all incremental V2G incentives remain
eligible to be claimed by sites that may also receive other state or federal-funded incentives.
Layering incentives will be essential to overcoming the high upfront costs of bidirectional
charging infrastructure and accelerating adoption, especially as the current V2G market is
relatively nascent. By adopting these recommendations, the DPU can position Massachusetts as a
leader in V2G deployment, delivering benefits to ratepayers, advancing grid resilience, and
supporting the state’s clean energy and transportation electrification goals.
V. Conclusion
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments and looks forward to
working with Eversource, National Grid, Unitil, the Department, and other stakeholders to
ensure the success of Massachusetts’s transportation electrification efforts.
Respectfully submitted,
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
4