August 21, 2025
CPUC Energy Division Tariff Unit
505 Van Ness Avenue
San Francisco, California 94102
EDTariffUnit@cpuc.ca.gov
Re: Protest of the Vehicle Grid Integration Council to Advice Letter 5596-E of
Southern California Edison Company: Notice of Attainment of Megawatt
Targets for the Southern California Edison Expanded Dynamic Rate Pilot
Dear Sir or Madam:
Pursuant to the provisions of General Order 96-B, the Vehicle Grid Integration Council
(“VGIC”) hereby submits this Protest to the above-referenced Supplement to Advice Letter 5596-
E of Southern California Edison (“SCE”), Notice of Attainment of Megawatt Targets for the
Southern California Edison Expanded Dynamic Rate Pilot (“Advice Letter”) submitted on August
1, 2025.
I. INTRODUCTION
In Decision (“D.”) 24-01-032, the Commission directs SCE to extend its Dynamic Rates
Pilot (“DRP”) through December 2027. The Commission authorizes an upfront budget of
$2,000,000 for program administration costs and a variable program administration budget of an
additional $5,100,000, allocated in 33% increments when enrollment reaches 12.5 MW, 25 MW,
and 37.5 MW. The Advice Letter provides notice that “SCE can state with a high degree of
confidence that by August 3, 2025, a minimum of 125.5 MW will be participating in SCE’s
Expanded pilot.”1 VGIC commends SCE for quickly scaling enrollment up from the July 1, 2025,
start date to a level that surpasses the targets required to unlock additional program administration
budget. VGIC generally supports providing additional program administration funds to SCE to
allow it to appropriately implement the expanded DRP. However, SCE’s implementation of DRP
fundamentally does not comply with the vision of D.24-01-032 and, as such, VGIC believes the
additional program administration should not be unlocked unless SCE submits a supplemental
advice letter expanding eligibility to certain customers and, in turn, properly implements DRP.
Specifically, SCE’s exclusion of non-NEM exporting customers, namely bidirectional charging
1 Advice Letter at 2.

August 21, 2025
Page 2 of 5
customers, represents a significant departure from the Commission guidance provided in D.24-01-
032.
D.24-01-032 dedicates discussion section 7 to “Whether to Add New Customer Eligibility
Rules to the Pilots.” It highlights that the staff proposal recommended allowing BTM storage
systems and EVSE to participate in the expanded pilots subject to the requirements in Attachment
B. The referenced Attachment B is focused primarily on the treatment of bidirectional charging
equipment, detailing how such equipment should be treated in the DRP. Specifically, Attachment
B states:
• “Any DC V2G EVSE that has UL 1741 certification…may interconnect initially
for the purpose of participating in the expanded pilots. (emphasis added)”
• “Only during participation in the expanded pilots, the customer (or the
customer’s authorized third party) is permitted to virtually aggregate separately
metered EVSE that have a Rule 21 interconnection agreement with other load and
generation… to allow export from the EVSE to reduce the host site’s load and
export from such aggregation… (emphasis added).”
In D.24-01-032, the Commission then states, “It is reasonable to allow customers with BTM
storage systems, including sub-metered systems, to participate in the expanded pilots...” and “It is
reasonable to allow customers with EVSE, including sub-metered systems, to participate in the
pilot, subject to the rules in Attachment B.”2 The Commission’s unquestionable intent in
coming to this determination and including Attachment B is that bidirectional charging
customers be eligible to participate in DRP. Neither SCE nor the Commission has since
provided evidence that the Commission erred in making this determination.
VGIC understands that SCE had a difficult time starting DRP, launching it over a year after
it was initially meant to launch. We are aware that the pilot is complex, incorporating innovative
elements like a subscription component and highly granular distribution price signals. While we
are disappointed that SCE could not develop its offering as fast as PG&E, our primary concern is
that these delays unfairly discriminate against bidirectional charging customers who wish to
participate. These customers are eager to adopt new technologies that are costly for them and seek
opportunities to support the grid through the DRP. Similarly, the aggregators or “ASPs” that
coordinate customer response have been making significant investments for several years to take
advantage of DRP and other CalFUSE rate initiatives based on the clear signals through the
CalFUSE whitepaper, subsequent working group, D.24-01-032 (including, namely, Attachment B
which specifically details the treatment of bidirectional charging equipment), and PG&E
implementation of the CalFUSE for exports that they can enroll customers in the pilot. In reviewing
2 D.24-01-032 at 58.

August 21, 2025
Page 3 of 5
SCE’s 2024 RFP soliciting ASPs, aggregators of bidirectional charging customers were provided
no notice by SCE that they would not be eligible to participate in the DRP, as they continued to
operate in response to all subsequent guidance and regulatory signals (i.e., the CalFUSE
whitepaper, working group, D.24-01-032, PG&E’s implementation of CalFUSE for exports, and
even the CEC’s REDWDS grants, which provide funding for bidirectional charging initiatives
with the express goal of leveraging dynamic pricing). In other words, somewhere along the
implementation process, it appears that SCE unilaterally decided that it would not offer the DRP
to bidirectional charging customers, despite guidance from the Commission expressly detailing
the treatment of bidirectional charging equipment, and without notifying the Commission or the
industry about these eligibility determinations. It was only in response to a data request found in
an appendix to testimony from another party in an unrelated issue in SCE’s General Rate Case
proceeding that SCE revealed this eligibility determination.3 Under no interpretation does this
history represent a record of good-faith execution on the Commission’s guidance in D.24-01-032.
With this in mind, VGIC protests the Advice Letter on the grounds that SCE has not
complied with D.24-01-032, as it does not offer the DRP to bidirectional charging customers. To
cure this deficiency, VGIC recommends that SCE submit a supplemental advice letter
detailing its plan to offer DRP participation to non-NEM exporting customers, effective
immediately, including bidirectional charging customers. Upon submission of this
supplemental advice letter, SCE should be granted the full program administration budget so that
it has sufficient resources to accept these new customers into the pilot. VGIC expands on these
grounds for protest in the comments below.
II. GROUNDS FOR PROTEST
A. SCE’s Request Violates Commission Decision 24-01-032.
As detailed above, D.24-01-032 intentionally discusses the treatment of bidirectional charging
customers in the expanded pilots. It highlights that the eligibility of BTM storage systems and
EVSE to participate in the expanded pilots subject to the requirements in Attachment B of the
Decision. Attachment B states:
3 In response to a recent data request from Cal Advocates, SCE states “while not explicitly discussed in
our implementation plan, Net Energy Meter (NEM) and Solar Billing Plan (SBP) customers are eligible to
participate in the expanded pilot.” (see
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/SupDoc/A2403019/7847/546561478.pdf page B-12). When Cal
Advocates asked “Please explain what requirements must be met for customers enrolled in the Expanded
Pilot to export load,” SCE responded by stating “Customers enrolled in NEM 1.0, NEM 2.0, or SBP and
enrolled in an eligible pilot rate, and are not enrolled in any disqualifying demand response programs,
would be eligible to participate in the pilot and receive credits for exporting load.” (see
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/SupDoc/A2403019/7847/546561478.pdf at page B-14).

August 21, 2025
Page 4 of 5
• “Any DC V2G EVSE that has UL 1741 certification…may interconnect initially
for the purpose of participating in the expanded pilots. (emphasis added)”
• “Only during participation in the expanded pilots, the customer (or the customer’s
authorized third party) is permitted to virtually aggregate separately metered EVSE that have a
Rule 21 interconnection agreement with other load and generation… to allow export from the
EVSE to reduce the host site’s load and export from such aggregation… (emphasis added).”
The Commission states, in no uncertain terms, that “It is reasonable to allow customers with BTM
storage systems, including sub-metered systems, to participate in the expanded pilots...” and “It is
reasonable to allow customers with EVSE, including sub-metered systems, to participate in
the pilot, subject to the rules in Attachment B. (emphases added)”
If SCE had properly implemented DRP to date, SCE’s request would be consistent with the
process for notifying the Commission and, subsequently, being authorized over $5 million in
additional program administration funds. However, since the SCE is not compliant with D.24-01-
032 to begin with, its request for these funds, by way of notifying the Commission of enrollment
numbers, violates D.24-01-032.
B. Advice Letter 5596-E Contains Material Errors, as the Reported Enrollment is in a
Pilot that Is Not in Compliance with D.24-01-032.
VGIC reiterates its appreciation for SCE in expanding its efforts so quickly to include a large
amount of potential load shift. However, the Advice Letter contains material errors, as it
presupposes that the DRP in itself complies with D.24-01-032. VGIC reiterates that the pilot does
not comply with the Commission’s direction in D.24-01-032 and, as such, the Advice Letter is
materially inaccurate in its claims of enrollment numbers. While SCE may have enrolled many
customers in a pilot, it is not the pilot ordered in D.24-01-032, as it excludes customers for which
treatment is explicitly detailed in the Decision.
C. SCE’s Request to Exclude Certain Customers from Participating in the Dynamic
Rate Pilot is Discriminatory and Unjust for these Participants.
SCE’s request for over $5 million in additional program administration funds without including
customers that are meant to be included in the pilot represents discriminatory and unjust treatment
for certain participants. Specifically, bidirectional charging customers, and the aggregators that
invest and the capabilities required to leverage the technology in support of California’s reliability
and affordability goals, are being shut out of the pilot.

August 21, 2025
Page 5 of 5
III. WHAT IS “AT STAKE” FOR THE FUTURE OF V2X.
VGIC’s critical and overarching concern is that the market for V2X products and services is still
emerging, and there are very few stable revenue streams available that can help this suite of
technologies develop even further. As noted above, the dynamic rate pilot is one of the only forms
of utility compensation for V2X solutions in California. Thus, VGIC stresses the importance of
withholding SCE’s additional $5 million in program administration funding until they explicitly
deem bidirectional charging customers eligible for DRP. This will allow new market entrants to
test the viability of different operating paradigms and use cases and scale their operations. Notably,
the recent report from CPUC, CARB, CEC, and other state agencies in response to the Governor’s
June 12, 2025 executive order details the use of dynamic pricing to support bidirectional charging.
Without enabling participation from these customers in the DRP, the Commission would forego
any lessons learned that would have arose from V2X participation in the dynamic rate pilots, which
is particularly important given the long-term intent to offer mass-market optional dynamic rates to
these same customers.
IV. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit this Protest to the supplemental Advice Letter.
We look forward to collaborating with stakeholders on this important initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
Vehicle Grid Integration Council
cc: Connor Flanigan, SCE (AdviceTariffManager@sce.com)
Adam Smight c/o Karyn Gansecki, SCE (Karyn.Gansecki@sce.com)
Service list of R.22-07-005