BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF NEVADA
Application of Nevada Power Company d/b/a Docket No. 25-12031
NV Energy, filed under Advice Letter No. 562,
to revise Tariff No. 1-B to modify Generating
Facility Interconnections Rule No. 15 pursuant
to the Order issued in Docket No. 24-05041
PETITION FOR LEAVE TO INTERVENE OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION
COUNCIL
Pursuant to Nevada Administrative Code (“NAC”) sections 703.580, 703.585, 703.590,
and 703.595, the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) respectfully petitions for the
Commission to grant leave for VGIC to intervene in the above-referenced proceeding. VGIC
requests to be placed on the service list for this proceeding and to receive all future notices and
pleadings in this matter electronically at the following addresses:
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
Attn: Zach Woogen, Executive Director
1401 21st St., Suite 5409
Sacramento, California 95811
(279) 895-7855
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
zwoogen@vgicouncil.org
I. DESCRIPTION OF VGIC.
VGIC is a national 501(c)6 member-based advocacy group committed to advancing the
role of vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”) through policy development, education, and research.
VGIC aims to ensure the value from flexible EV charging and discharging is recognized and
compensated to achieve a more reliable, affordable, and efficient electric grid. VGIC’s members
include automotive original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”), EV charging station
manufacturers, EV charging site developers, distributed energy resource (“DER”) aggregators, EV
1

charging station installers, operations, and maintenance providers, EV and charging station
hardware suppliers, and publicly-owned electric utilities.
II. INTEREST IN THIS PROCEEDING.
As it relates to the requirements in NAC 703.595(2)(a)-(c) and NAC 703.580, VGIC’s
membership includes companies that deploy residential and non-residential bidirectional EV
charging systems, sometimes referred to as “Vehicle-to-Grid” or “V2G” systems, including Ford,
General Motors, Tesla, and Nissan. These members have a direct and substantial interest in the
outcome of this proceeding, as NV Energy proposes revisions to its interconnection regulation,
Rule No. 15. The proposed Rule No. 15 revisions detail the interconnection processes and
requirements for bidirectional charging systems in its service territory. Given that VGIC’s member
companies will conform to these interconnection rules, the outcomes of this proceeding have a
direct, material impact on the technology choices, development and deployment costs, and related
business decisions of VGIC’s members and, in turn, VGIC’s members’ customers.
VGIC intends to participate in this proceeding to ensure that the proposed Rule No. 15
adequately accounts for impacts on VGIC’s members. This representation of member interests
before a Public Utility Commission proceeding is a core function of VGIC’s day-to-day policy
development and engagement operations. VGIC’s unique interests in bidirectional charging
solutions will not be adequately represented by any other party in this proceeding, and VGIC attests
that its intervention will not unduly broaden the issues in this proceeding.
VGIC will offer factual contentions related to how specific elements of NV Energy’s
proposed Rule No. 15 revisions will impact vendor and customer behavior in support of grid safety
and reliability. These contentions are directly pertinent to the issues presented in the proceeding.
2

III. CONCLUSION.
VGIC’s participation in this proceeding will not prejudice any party and will not delay the
schedule or broaden the scope of the issues in the proceeding. For the reasons stated above, VGIC
respectfully requests that the Commission grant this Petition for Leave to Intervene.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: February 4, 2026
3

CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE
I hereby certify that I have on this date caused the above “PETITION FOR LEAVE TO
INTERVENE OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL” to be served pursuant to the
laws of the State of Nevada by electronic mail (e-mail) to all persons with a valid e-mail address
on the below service list.
Executed February 4, 2026 at Sacramento, California
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
1401 21st St., Suite 5409
Sacramento, California 95811
(279) 895-7855
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
zwoogen@vgicouncil.org
Service List
Aaron Schaar Aaron.schaar@nvenergy.com
NV Energy
Jennifer Fedinec jfedinec@nvenergy.com
NV Energy
Roman Borisov roman.borisov@nvenergy.com
NV Energy
Fred Voltz zebedee_177@yahoo.com
Fred Voltz
Midhat Mafazy midhatm@irecusa.org
IREC
NV Energy Regulatory Dept regulatory@nvenergy.com
NV Energy
Attorney General’s Bureau of Consumer bcpserv@ag.nv.gov
Protection
Michael Saunders msaunders@ag.nv.gov
Bureau of Consumer Protection
Staff Counsel Pucn.sc@pucn.nv.gov
scassity@puc.nv.gov
dlomoljo@puc.nv.gov
tsundheim@puc.nv.gov
4