July 29, 2026
Hon. Michelle L. Phillips
Secretary
New York Public Service Commission
3 Empire State Plaza
Albany, NY 12223-1350
RE: Case 18-E-0138 – Proceeding on Motion of the Commission Regarding Electric Vehicle
Supply Equipment and Infrastructure
Notice of Errata
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) submits this Notice of Errata to correct and
replace a paragraph appearing on pages 5–6 of its July 17, 2026 comments concerning the
tradeoffs of OEM-authorized and customer-authorized telematics pathways.
Upon further review, VGIC determined that several statements were inaccurate, namely that we
had mischaracterized the findings of the cited Technical Standards Working Group Report
Addressing Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment and Telematics Accuracy and conflated these
findings with the related Methodology for Testing the Accuracy of Data Collected from Managed
Charging Enabling Technologies report created by EPRI and filed by the Joint Utilities in
September 2024. The TSWG Report did not compare OEM-authorized and customer-credential-
based pathways. The original language does not accurately reflect the evidence available to
VGIC.
VGIC therefore deletes the paragraph beginning “These tradeoffs include the benefits and costs
of OEM-authorized telematics,” appearing on pages 5–6 of its July 17, 2026 comments, and
replaces it in its entirety with the following:
“These tradeoffs include the benefits and costs of OEM-authorized telematics vs
customer-authorized telematics. These approaches may be suitable for different use cases,
depending on the access to and fidelity of the collected data. As such, the JU and
Commission should continue detailing the appropriate use cases and tradeoffs for OEM-
authorized telematics vs customer-authorized telematics. Although there is some
variation among them, OEM-authorized telematics are generally based on defined data
schemas, data collection methods, and error-handling expectations. Customer-authorized
telematics rely on customer credentials and endpoints designed to leverage existing
consumer apps. Both pathways share commonalities, as detailed in the Technical
Standards Working Group Report Addressing Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment and
Telematics Accuracy (TSWG Report), filed September 2, 2025. First, both pathways
leverage the same underlying telematics data sources, though they may be structured
1

differently. Second, the vehicle telematics data sources, in general, were not historically
purpose-built to support managed charging programs or utility use cases. Third, it is
clearly possible to address certain errors or gaps in the underlying telematics data by
processing it to make it suitable for use in a managed charging program or utility use
cases.”
“These tradeoffs include the benefits and costs of OEM-authorized telematics vs
customer-credential-based telematics. These approaches may be suitable for different use
cases, depending on the access to and fidelity of the collected data, as well as the
functionality, security, and operational requirements of the program. As such, the JU and
Commission should continue detailing the appropriate use cases and tradeoffs for OEM-
authorized telematics vs customer-credential-based telematics. Although there is some
variation among them, OEM-authorized telematics are generally based on defined data
schemas, access permissions, data collection methods, error-handling expectations, and
change-management processes. Customer-credential-based telematics rely on customer
credentials and endpoints designed to leverage existing consumer apps. The Methodology
for Testing the Accuracy of Data Collected from Managed Charging Enabling
Technologies (EPRI Report), filed September 12, 2024, evaluated both “OEM-provided”
and “third-party hosted” telematics data, but did not compare OEM-authorized and
customer-credential-based access models. The EPRI Report found that telematics
performance may vary based on factors including measurement methods, session
duration, auxiliary loads, and provider-applied adjustments.1 Additionally, it is clear to
VGIC based on the data in the EPRI Report that it is possible to address certain errors or
gaps in the underlying telematics data by processing it to make it suitable for use in a
managed charging program or utility use cases.2”
Except as corrected above, VGIC’s July 17, 2026 comments remain unchanged.
Respectfully submitted,
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
vgiregulatory@vgicouncil.org
1 Methodology for Testing the Accuracy of Data Collected from Managed Charging Enabling Technologies. EPRI.
2024. Page 9. https://documents.dps.ny.gov/public/Common/ViewDoc.aspx?DocRefId={70B1E691-0000-C92C-
882F-08E29400DA77}&DocTitle=JU%20TATF%20Report%2009-12-2024
2 For example, the “telematics provider” for at least one of the three vehicles tested in the TSWG EPRI Report
reported a of “compensation” to account for “upstream losses and utilization specific for this EV.” See EPRI Report
at 12-14.
2