July 17, 2026
Hon. Michelle L. Phillips
Secretary
New York Public Service Commission
3 Empire State Plaza
Albany, NY 12223-1350
RE: Case 18-E-0138: Proceeding on Motion of the Commission to Regarding Electric
Vehicle Supply Equipment and Infrastructure.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL (VGIC)
ON JOINT UTILITIES COMPREHENSIVE RESIDENTIAL MANAGED CHARGING
REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC) is a 501(c)(6) membership-based trade
association committed to advancing vehicle-grid integration (VGI) through policy development,
education, and research. VGIC aims to ensure that the value of flexible EV charging and
discharging is recognized and compensated, thereby achieving a more affordable, reliable, and
efficient energy future. Established in 2020, VGIC represents 35 members1, including
automotive original equipment manufacturers (OEMs), leading electric vehicle service providers
(EVSPs) and aggregators, electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) manufacturers and site
developers, and non-investor-owned utilities. VGIC prioritizes collaborative engagement with all
VGI champions and remains business model- and technology-agnostic in pursuing its mission.
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., Ford Motor Company,
General Motors, Nissan Group of North America, Bidirectional Energy, BMW of North America LLC, bodeEV,
ChargePoint, ChargeScape, Codibly Inc., Critical Loop, dcbel, Eaton Corporation, EnergyHub, Enphase,
EV.Energy, Fermata Energy, Mercedes-Benz Research & Development North America, Inc., Orange Charger, Inc.,
Renew Home, Rivian, Stellantis, SWTCH Energy Inc., Tesla, The Mobility House, Toyota Motor North America,
Inc., UL Solutions, WeaveGrid, Clean Power Alliance, Connecticut Green Bank, Los Angeles Department of Water
and Power, Marin Clean Energy, San Diego Community Power, Sacramento Municipal Utility District, and Salt
River Project. The views expressed in these Comments are those of VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views
of all individual VGIC member companies or supporters. (https://www.vgicouncil.org/)
1

VGIC appreciates the opportunity to comment on the Joint Utilities’ (JU) Comprehensive
Residential Managed Charging Report (JU Report), filed March 16, 2026.
II. VGIC COMMENTS ON THE JOINT UTILITIES’ RECOMMENDATION #1.
VGIC agrees that utilities should explore more advanced objectives, including “dynamic
alignment” and “supply cost optimization and alignment with periods of low-carbon or
renewable energy supply.”2 The JU Report states that managed charging, including both passive
programs and active programs, “consistently deliver grid value.”3 They further report on the
value of active managed charging programs, detailing its ability to “…offer more precise control
to deliver more value…”4 However, the JU Report points to limited opportunities to use the
active charge management capabilities to deliver additional value, such as through dynamic
alignment with low-supply cost hours or low-carbon/high-renewable periods.5
The JU’s findings regarding the value of active managed charging and vehicle-grid
integration programs, aligned with more dynamic signals and co-optimization with
decarbonization objectives, are consistent with the extensive existing literature from other
programs and studies. A recent report published by VGIC and the Smart Electric Power Alliance
(SEPA), developed jointly with leading automakers, charger manufacturers, aggregators, and
utilities, provides a summary list of key relevant studies, included below in Table 1.
Table 1. Recent VGI Studies and Analysis from Valuing Vehicle-Grid Integration Programs6
Title Author Year Published
A Roadmap to Unlocking the Benefits of Bidirectional California Energy Commission and 2026
Charging National Laboratory of the Rockies
Demonstrating the Full Value of Managed Electric Vehicle Brattle 2026
Charging: Based on a Real-World Trial of EnergyHub's EV
Solution
2 JU Report at 20-21.
3 Id. at 18.
4 Id. at 19.
5 Id. at 20.
6 Fitzgerald et al. Valuing Vehicle-Grid Integration Programs: A Tool for Improving Energy Affordability through
EV Grid Services. May 2026.
https://www.vgicouncil.org/s/SEPA324VGICVehicleGridIntegrationProgramsReportFinal.pdf
2

Residential vehicle-to-grid profits under dynamic pricing: The Stanford University and VW Group 2026
role of real-world charging behavior
Distribution Grid Electrification Model 2025 Study and California Public Advocates Office 2025
Report
DRAFT Electrification Impact Study Part 2 Pacific Gas & Electric 2025
Electrification Impacts Study Part 2: Draft Report Southern California Edison 2025
Harnessing the Power of Electric Vehicles Union of Concerned Scientists 2025
Impact of electric vehicle charging demand on power Yanning Li and Alan Jenn, UC 2025
distribution grid congestion Berkeley
New York's Grid Flexibility Potential: Volume I: Summary Brattle 2025
Report
Peak Potential: Load Management for an Affordable Net-Zero Energy + Environmental Economics 2025
Grid
PG&E Draft Electrification Impact Study Part 2 Energy + Environmental Economics 2025
Standard Review Projects and AB 1082/1083 Pilots: Cadmus 2025
Evaluation Year 2024
The Utility Playbook: Turning EV Grid Risk into a $30 Brattle 2025
Billion Opportunity
Multi-State Transportation Electrification Impact Study National Laboratory of the Rockies, 2024
Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, Kevala, and U.S.
Department of Energy
The State of Managed Charging in 2024: the Next Iteration: Smart Electric Power Alliance 2024
Distribution-Level Optimization
Unlocking the Value of Flexible DERs Energy + Environmental Economics 2024
Economic Analysis of Vehicle-to-Grid Fleets for Grid Pacific Northwest National 2023
Services Laboratory
Quantifying the Financial Impacts of EVs on Utility Lawrence Berkeley National 2023
Ratepayers and Shareholders Laboratory
Advanced Rate Designs Harnessing Vehicle-Grid Integration Energy + Environmental Economics, 2021
Technology Honda
The value of consumer acceptance of controlled electric UC Irvine and Rochester Institute of 2021
vehicle charging in a decarbonizing grid: The case of Technology
California
3

Final Report of the California Joint Agencies Vehicle-Grid Joint California State Agencies 2020
Integration Working Group
Distribution System Constrained Vehicle-to-Grid Services for EPRI 2019
Improved Grid Stability and Reliability
EPRI - Open Standards-Based Vehicle-to-Grid: Value EPRI 2019
Assessment
The Costs of Revving Up the Grid for Electric Vehicles Boston Consulting Group 2019
The Potential Electric Grid Benefits of Vehicle-to-Grid Lawrence Livermore National 2018
Technology in California Laboratory
The JU Report and the above-listed literature collectively detail clear benefits of maturing
the portfolio of New York’s managed charging programs. Without clear direction to significantly
expand the use of active managed charging to unlock greater distribution system optimization
benefits, implement more dynamic cost optimization, and co-optimize with decarbonization
goals, these benefits may remain locked away behind existing but latent EV flexibility capability.
The JU Report recommends the Commission “allow utilities to include program designs
that incorporate these additional objectives in modifications provided that they align with the
guidance and categories outlined in Recommendation #4.”7 Rather than merely “allowing”
utilities to include these program design elements, VGIC recommends the Commission
explicitly order them to do so in any forthcoming proposals, applications, or utility-led
program changes. VGIC urges this more direct and prescriptive approach because of the high
cost of inaction, should a utility opt out of implementing these higher-value capabilities. New
York’s energy affordability, reliability, and decarbonization future depends significantly on the
degree to which utilities tap all currently available tools, including unlocking already-deployed,
customer-owned energy resources like EVs and EVSE.
III. VGIC COMMENTS ON THE JOINT UTILITIES’ RECOMMENDATION #2.
The JU Report highlights the utilities’ firsthand experience working with vendors, as well
as their detailed knowledge of their own capabilities to leverage existing vendors' offerings to
meet grid needs. The primary goal of managed charging and VGI broadly is to ensure that EV
7 JU Report at 21.
4

load flexibility is recognized and compensated to support an affordable, reliable, and
decarbonized energy future. VGIC offers the comments below to align Recommendation #2 as
closely as possible with this primary goal.
Overall, VGIC supports multiple participation pathways and recognizes that these
multiple pathways offer various benefits and risks. We encourage the utilities to consider the
relevant tradeoffs when assessing vendors and partners. Customers’ options for participating in a
managed charging program should reflect a utility’s service territories, program objectives, and
available technologies. Eligible pathways should include both networked EVSE and vehicle
telematics, as long as the chosen approaches are capable of reliably meeting managed charging
program goals. No single pathway will serve every customer, vehicle, charging configuration, or
use case. Utilities should evaluate available options based on supporting enrollment rates,
customer access, cost, reliability, functionality, and data quality, and explain their pathway
selections in their Managed Charging Implementation Plans. This flexibility should not result in
unnecessarily narrow eligibility that excludes significant numbers of customers or imposes
undue limits on competition among automakers, charging providers, and program vendors.
Greater participation pathways can support program scale, thereby increasing program cost-
effectiveness and, ultimately, supporting New York’s affordability, reliability, and
decarbonization efforts.
The JU Report notes:
Ultimately, program effectiveness is the result of holistically evaluating the available
program delivery options and associated tradeoffs, considering factors such as customer
access, cost, reliability, functionality, and data quality when selecting vendors to support
managed charging programs.8
VGIC generally agrees with this finding, especially regarding the evaluation of tradeoffs and the
consideration of functionality. These tradeoffs include the benefits and costs of OEM-authorized
telematics vs customer-authorized telematics. These approaches may be suitable for different use
cases, depending on the access to and fidelity of the collected data. As such, the JU and
Commission should continue detailing the appropriate use cases and tradeoffs for OEM-
8 JU Report at 24.
5

authorized telematics vs customer-authorized telematics. Although there is some variation
among them, OEM-authorized telematics are generally based on defined data schemas, data
collection methods, and error-handling expectations. Customer-authorized telematics rely on
customer credentials and endpoints designed to leverage existing consumer apps. Both pathways
share commonalities, as detailed in the Technical Standards Working Group Report Addressing
Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment and Telematics Accuracy (TSWG Report), filed September 2,
2025. First, both pathways leverage the same underlying telematics data sources, though they
may be structured differently. Second, the vehicle telematics data sources, in general, were not
historically purpose-built to support managed charging programs or utility use cases. Third, it is
clearly possible to address certain errors or gaps in the underlying telematics data by processing
it to make it suitable for use in a managed charging program or utility use cases.
The tradeoffs across various participation pathways, including networked EVSE, OEM-
authorized telematics, and customer-authorized telematics, also extend to associated customer
engagement channels. Leveraging a variety of marketing and enrollment channels provides a
strong foundation for program scale. Marketing and enrollment can be supported through mobile
applications, email marketing, dealerships, installer and electrician outreach, and other OEM and
EVSE channels likely to offer cost-effective pathways to enroll many customers efficiently.
However, it is important to note that customer engagement tools may not offer an equal
experience across all participation pathways or even different providers within a single
participation pathway. As such, choices around customer engagement and enrollment channels
may ultimately impact the extent and quality of program access, as well as the ability for
customers to re-access the program after customer- or vendor-induced changes to hardware or
software.
Regardless of the chosen participation pathways and associated customer engagement
channels, significant investment will likely be required to expand enrollment, as the overall state
of industry- and utility-led customer engagement in managed charging programs remains
relatively nascent. This same dynamic is found when considering the state of customer education
for EVs, generally, with Plug In America’s 2026 Annual EV Driver Survey demonstrating EV
drivers self-report EV-specific websites or forums (78.6%), video reviewers (57.1%), and friends
6

and family (31.9%) as their top sources of “useful” information.9 Regarding managed charging,
only about 20% of EV owners reported they received education or advice from dealerships on
how to optimize home charging in JD Power’s 2026 U.S. Electric Vehicle Experience Home
Charging Study.10 These findings suggest an overall underperformance in customer engagement
strategies, including utility-, OEM-, and non-OEM-managed channels. VGIC recommends that
the utilities consider any relevant trade-offs in customer engagement tools arising from the
chosen participation pathways.
As detailed in VGIC’s Comments on the Technical Standards Working Group Report
Addressing EVSE and Telematics Accuracy and DPS Staff Questions, filed December 8, 2025,
and our subsequent reply comments filed December 22, 2025,11 we anticipate the reliability, data
accuracy, and other tradeoffs of vendor offerings, including those highlighted above, will
become much more important considerations as three factors mature:
(1) overall program enrollment;
(2) program focus on distribution system optimization;
(3) enrollment of customers in dynamic and dispatchable active managed charging
programs.
As each of these factors evolves, the operational importance of the programs is likely to increase,
as will the cost stemming from limited customer access, reliability, functionality, and data
quality. Similarly, the extent to which the grid relies on managed charging programs can have
implications for cybersecurity needs. As such, the utilities should also consider the evolving
performance requirements they demand from vendors, including by leveraging existing customer
9 Plug In America. 2026 Annual EV Driver Survey. July, 2026. https://pluginamerica.org/wp-
content/uploads/2026/07/2026-Plug-In-America-EV-Driver-Annual-Survey-Report.pdf
10 JD Power. EV Home Charging Costs Rise and Satisfaction Falls, but Few EV Owners Take Advantage of Scheduled
Charging or Smart Chargign Programs, JD Power Finds. March 23, 2026.
https://www.jdpower.com/business/press-releases/2026-us-electric-vehicle-experience-evx-home-charging-
study/
11 See: Comments of the Vehicle Grid Integration Council (VGIC) on the Technical Standards Working Group
Report Addressing EVSE and Telematics Accuracy and DPS Staff Questions. Case 18-E-0138. December 8, 2025;
and Reply Comments of the Vehicle Grid Integration Council (VGIC) on the Technical Standards Working Group
Report Addressing EVSE and Telematics Accuracy and DPS Staff Questions. Case 18-E-0138. December 22, 2025.
7

data access frameworks used for Green Button Connect, EDI, and similar initiatives. These
performance requirements may be met by vendors through sufficient data completeness,
accuracy, latency, and affordability; error handling and continuity of customer experience;
cybersecurity practices, including those based on NIST standards; ability to support relevant
measurement and verification requirements; ability to support program goals without
compromising customer mobility needs; and the pathways’ suitability for the desired use cases,
including passive managed charging, active managed charging, and bidirectional charging.
As programs continue to optimize for greater grid services, such as localized distribution
constraints, deferring or avoiding infrastructure upgrades, improving hosting capacity for
electrification, and supporting more efficient operation of the distribution grid, the available
participation pathways and enabling technology integrations should be similarly optimized. With
this in mind, the VGIC recommends that the Commission direct the JU to clearly define the core
performance standards and capabilities it seeks, and to use the RFP process to assess and
compare vendors’ capabilities to meet these standards. In contrast to our comments above on
Recommendation #1, which urge specificity regarding the goals of managed charging
programs, our feedback on Recommendation #2 urges providing the JU, who have firsthand
experience implementing programs, with flexibility in the means to achieve Commission-set
program goals.
As overall program enrollment, focus on distribution system optimization, and
enrollment of customers in dynamic and dispatchable active managed charging programs
grow, VGIC recommends that the Commission consider prescribing more specific
standards for customer access, cost, reliability, functionality, and data quality. These
standards should be closely aligned with related national efforts, including those from standards
bodies or industry-led efforts, as detailed in VGIC’s Comments on the Technical Standards
Working Group Report Addressing EVSE and Telematics Accuracy and DPS Staff Questions,
filed December 8, 2025, and our subsequent reply comments filed December 22, 2025. Adopting
more specific, fit-for-purpose, and nationally aligned measurement and verification requirements
that reflect how the data will be used will reduce risk and expand benefits as programs and
emerging technologies continue to mature.
8

IV. VGIC COMMENTS ON THE JOINT UTILITIES’ RECOMMENDATION #3.
VGIC supports establishing an evergreen program structure with triennial review and
budget cycles. This will send a clear regulatory signal to industry actors, providing market
certainty and facilitating investment that will enable greater technological capabilities, including
both managed charging and bidirectional charging solutions. Moreover, program continuity
mitigates the risk of disrupting customer engagement and, in turn, undermining program goals.
A triennial review and budgeting cycle strikes an appropriate balance of long-term
market stability with necessary regulatory oversight and accountability. During these reviews,
the Commission and other interested parties can assess performance and recommend or adopt
modifications to budget categories, technology requirements, and/or incentive structures to meet
evolving grid needs and solution capabilities.
In addition to the base triennial review and budget cycle, VGIC also recommends the
Commission grant utilities flexibility to seek off-cycle program and budget modifications if
participation materially strays from expectations (in either direction) and/or to extend existing
authorizations if unforeseen policy and regulatory developments threaten the continuity of the
program lapse. Overall, any material change should remain transparent, data-driven, and subject
to stakeholder input.
V. VGIC COMMENTS ON THE JOINT UTILITIES’ RECOMMENDATION #4.
As detailed above, VGIC supports a triennial review with flexibility to seek off-cycle
changes. To facilitate efficiency and limit delay, mechanisms for interim or off-cycle program
updates should also be defined by the Commission. This is needed as technologies, customer
preferences, and utility program learnings are continually evolving. As such, VGIC supports the
proposed tiered approach to modifications:
• Immaterial changes and administrative updates: Adding eligible vehicle or charger
models, eligible vendors or channels through which customers can enroll, minor
incentive adjustments within Commission-authorized parameters, and similarly minor
9

program updates should be implementable without formal Commission or DPS staff
approval.
• Department of Public Service (DPS) Staff review: Limited modifications and/or specific
time-bound pilots or demonstrations, for example, testing new technologies, should
require only DPS Staff review and approval.
• Commission approval: Material changes to program objectives, eligibility, or incentive
structures should remain subject to full Commission review and stakeholder comment.
This flexibility can reduce administrative burden and allow programs to evolve alongside the
technology landscape, customer understanding, and utility learnings. Regardless of the approach
taken, changes should be made apparent on utility- or vendor-maintained program webpages, in
any interim program reporting, or, if a formal proposal to the Commission, on the docket card.
VI. VGIC RESPECTFULLY URGES THE COMMISSION TO DIRECT
UTILITIES TO LAUNCH BIDIRECTIONAL CHARGING OFFERINGS AS A
SUBSET OF MANAGED CHARGING PROGRAMS IN THE NEAR-TERM.
Given the immense potential of dispatchable bidirectional charging systems to support
customer needs, bolster grid reliability, and lower system costs, as well as recent major
developments aimed at lowering the costs of bidirectional charging equipment, VGIC strongly
recommends that the Commission direct utilities to launch dispatchable bidirectional
charging offerings as a subset of managed charging programs.
Explicitly requiring each utility to propose a near-term bidirectional charging offering
within its managed charging portfolio will help to unlock latent energy storage capacity for New
York’s grid. Notably, the long-promised market for bidirectional charging is here today, with 18
light-duty vehicle models across 9 OEM brands currently offering grid-parallel bidirectional
charging features, as well as nearly every electric school bus sold in the U.S. over the last 5
years. New York stands as a stark outlier among its region and peer EV leadership states,
offering no dispatchable programs that enable bidirectional charging systems to support the grid.
California (via Emergency Load Reduction Program and Demand Side Grid Support) and
Massachusetts and Rhode Island (under ConnectedSolutions) have been leveraging dispatching
10

bidirectional charging systems for years to support real-time grid needs; Colorado and
Maryland’s approved dispatchable programs – Aggregator Virtual Power Plant and V2G Pilots,
respectively – support the enrollment of bidirectional charging systems. Customers in Texas
(under the Aggregated Distributed Energy Resource program) can export power from eligible
vehicles to dynamically support the grid when needed, while pending proposals in Virginia and
New Jersey and forthcoming filings in Connecticut and Illinois would enable the same. While
New York utilities offer static export credits to bidirectional charging customers through the
Value of Distributed Energy Resources (VDER) tariff, and NYSERDA continues to fund ad hoc
single-site technology demonstrations for bidirectional charging systems, these approaches
significantly underutilize the greatest feature of EVs and bidirectional charging systems:
widespread dispatchability.
As demonstrated by Table 1 in Section II above, the potential value of bidirectional
charging solutions is tremendous. Notably, the Grid of the Future analysis commissioned by the
Commission and developed by Brattle demonstrates that EVs – including both managed and
bidirectional charging – represent the largest single source of long-term load flexibility.
Meanwhile, the market and product readiness is evolving at a rapid pace, growing the ability for
dispatchable bidirectional charging systems to meaningfully support New York’s grid. For
example, the first AC bidirectional charging solution – in which inverter functionality is onboard
the vehicle – is now available in the U.S. market, offering access to these features at a lower
overall cost to the customer. In May 2026, UL 1741, the core certification standard for the safe
and reliable interconnection of generators and energy storage to utility systems, was updated to
incorporate UL 1741 SC, a long-awaited supplement intended to facilitate widespread,
interoperable, and low-cost bidirectional AC charging. In July 2026, ISO 15118-20 Amendment
1 was published, further catalyzing progress toward widespread, interoperable bidirectional
charging features for both DC and AC charging systems.
In anticipation of these key standards and other developments in the bidirectional
charging system market, several utilities and states have recently adopted or proposed updates to
interconnection rules, including in California, Connecticut, Maryland, Massachusetts, Nevada,
New Mexico, and Texas. Here, too, the JU and Commission remain outliers among their peers,
11

having not yet taken action to consider the updates needed to enable the safe interconnection of
grid-parallel AC bidirectional charging systems. VGIC looks forward to continued engagement
with New York’s Interconnection Technical Working Group to modernize the JU
interconnection rules to ensure the safe and reliable interconnection of bidirectional charging
systems. We respectfully request that the Commission, in this or another proceeding, set a
schedule for these updates, as previous ITWG updates have been ad hoc, hindering progress and
introducing significant uncertainty into market development.
As stated above, the primary barrier to unlocking dispatchable, grid-supportive
bidirectional charging remains the lack of an available program participation pathway for
customers. VGIC urges the Commission to directly address this gap in any upcoming order
directing changes to or the continuation of the JU managed charging program portfolio,
rather than deferring to future program cycles (i.e., the next triennial review) or other
venues facing delay (i.e., the Grid of the Future proceeding). VGIC remains an active
contributor to the Grid of the Future proceeding, including as a member of every Capability
Assessment Team managed by the Commission’s consultant, Guidehouse. However, near-term
progress on dispatchable bidirectional charging programs need not wait on the Grid of the Future
proceeding. Instead, VGIC recommends that the Commission “builds the bridge from both
ends.” In other words, near-term, participation-limited dispatchable bidirectional charging should
be enabled now through the JU managed charging program portfolio, as the Commission and
stakeholders develop long-term frameworks for leveraging dispatchable DERs. This can
establish a base of customers who can later be moved over, as appropriate, into the long-term
framework for leveraging dispatchable DERs. Additionally, this approach can provide key
learnings in the near-term to development Grid of the Future policies. Moreover, and perhaps
most obviously, New York can deploy these assets immediately by leveraging the underlying
customer enrollment, dispatch, and incentive structures already established by existing managed
charging programs. Lastly, such a program offering could establish an important alternative for
customers for whom the existing VDER tariff is not well-suited. This could be due to customer
mobility needs and/or preferences, as the ways customers interact with their vehicles and with
the grid through vehicles and chargers vary widely across customers.
12

With this in mind, VGIC reiterates its recommendation that the Commission should
direct the JUs to introduce near-term, dispatchable bidirectional charging offerings within the JU
managed charging portfolio as an alternative option to VDER. Participation can be limited, if
needed, to help ensure the primary focus of the programs remains on shifting EV load. This
approach is essential for gaining real-world experience to inform future policy developments,
accommodate diverse customer needs and preferences, and, more than anything, maximize the
grid and ratepayer benefits of existing customer-owned resources without “reinventing the
wheel” in program design.
VII. CONCLUSION
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments and looks forward to
working with the Commission, the joint utilities, and other stakeholders to ensure the success of
New York’s transportation electrification efforts.
Respectfully submitted,
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
vgiregulatory@vgicouncil.org
13