BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
FILED
05/29/26
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Update Rulemaking 25-08-004
04:59 PM
Distribution Level Interconnection (Filed August 14, 2025)
R2508004
Rules and Regulations.
REPLY COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE
ASSIGNED COMMISSIONER’S SCOPING MEMO AND RULING
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
1401 21st St., Suite 5409
Sacramento, California 95811
Telephone: (279) 895-7855
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
Grace Pratt
Caliber Strategies
801 K Street, Suite 2800
Sacramento, CA 95814
Telephone: (818) 264-6437
Email: grace@caliberstrat.com
Date: May 29, 2026

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Update Rulemaking 25-08-004
Distribution Level Interconnection (Filed August 14, 2025)
Rules and Regulations.
REPLY COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE
ASSIGNED COMMISSIONER’S SCOPING MEMO AND RULING
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) hereby submits
these reply comments on the Assigned Commissioner’s Scoping Memo and Ruling (“Scoping
Memo”), issued by President Alice Reynolds on March 3, 2026, as modified by the Email Ruling
Granting Extension for Comments, Motion to Late File NOI, and Motions for Party Status issued
by Administrative Law Judge Andrew Dugowson.
I. INTRODUCTION.
VGIC appreciates opening comments from parties on improvements to Rule 21 and Phase
1 issues. As California continues to advance transportation electrification, updates to Rule 21 will
play an increasingly important role in enabling bidirectional electric vehicle (“EV”) charging
systems to meet grid needs.
In this proceeding, VGIC looks forward to further improvements to Rule 21 that will better
enable the interconnection of distributed energy resources (“DERs”) and bidirectional charging
systems. In Opening Comments on the Scoping Memo, parties broadly discussed opportunities to
streamline interconnection processes for simpler projects, particularly non-export systems.1 VGIC
1 Advanced Energy United Opening Comments at 2; Electrify America Opening Comments at 4-6; PG&E
Opening Comments at 17; Tesla Opening Comments at 5-12.
1

supported these efforts in comments on the Order Instituting Rulemaking and encourages the
Commission to continue prioritizing streamlined review pathways and updates to technical
requirements that can improve interconnection efficiency while maintaining safety and reliability
standards. This effort may also include further clarification and refinement of bidirectional
charging system configurations and operational definitions. To the extent these issues cannot be
fully addressed during this phase of the proceeding, the Commission should prioritize more
detailed discussion of interconnection streamlining and technical requirement updates in Phase 2.
In Phase 1 of this proceeding, the Commission should ensure that interconnection processes
and fees appropriately reflect the operational characteristics and grid impacts of these technologies
and avoid creating unnecessary barriers to deployment. In these reply comments, VGIC provides
the following comments:
• Small non-NEM bidirectional charging systems should use the existing NEM / NBT
interconnection fee.
• The Commission should clarify that isolated, backup-only bidirectional systems and load-
only EV systems with disabled grid-parallel features2 are not subject to Rule 21
interconnection requirements.
II. SMALL NON-NEM BIDIRECTIONAL CHARGING SYSTEMS SHOULD USE
THE EXISTING NEM / NBT INTERCONNECTION FEE.
In Opening Comments, VGIC recommended that the Commission set the interconnection
application fee for non-NEM bidirectional charging systems equal to the interconnection fee
2 Load-only EV systems with disabled grid-parallel features are defined as systems that have the hardware
necessary to operate in parallel with the grid, but they cannot and do not operate in parallel with the grid
because they are prevented from doing so due to software controls and/or software locks. These systems
operate solely as load-only, EV charging resources.
2

currently in place for small NEM systems. Other parties made similar recommendations, with
Tesla and CALSSA explicitly recommending that the non-NEM interconnection application fee
align with the current NEM amounts.
These recommendations were made largely because of similarities between small NEM
and non-NEM systems. Tesla notes that “a residential non-exporting solar-plus-storage addition,
a residential standalone storage system or a V2G interconnection application has more in common
and probably should be directed to the same group and leverage the same review processes as
NEM/NBT projects.”3 CALSSA similarly notes that, “Such projects are not technically more
complex and do not create any novel risks to the grid. Many of the same processes used to evaluate
residential-scale NEM/NBT systems can be applied to evaluate smaller-scale V2G and exporting
standalone storage systems.”4 SEIA also proposes to eliminate the differentiation between NEM
and non-NEM projects and agrees that “Given the comparability of those projects both in terms of
scale/complexity and potential grid impacts disparate fees are not warranted.” 5
Currently, grid-parallel, bidirectional charging systems are treated under Rule 21 as a form
of energy storage because they use the same battery technology as stationary energy storage.
Namely, bidirectional charging systems use UL 1741 SB-certified systems: 1) The Ford Charge
Station Pro + Home Integration System, 2) GM Energy PowerShift Charge + V2H Enablement
Kit, 3) dcbel Ara, 4) Wallbox Quasar 2, 5) Nuvve TP-60DC-V2G-H1-C, Nuvve TP-40DCV2G-
H1-C, and Nuvve TP-20DC-V2G-H1-C, 6) InCharge Energy ICE-22-V2X, InCharge Energy
ICE44-V2X, InCharge Energy ICE-66 V2X, and InCharge Energy ICE-132 V2X, 7) Tellus Power
TP-V2G-60-480, Tellus Power TP-V2G-40-480, Tellus Power TP-V2G-30-480, and Tellus Power
3 Tesla Opening Comments at 15.
4 CALSSA Opening Comments at 19.
5 SEIA Opening Comments at 65.
3

TP-V2G-20-480 bidirectional charging systems are all certified to UL 1741 SB.6 In addition, the
Tesla Powershare Grid Support system, leveraging the Tesla Universal Wall Connector, now
meets IEEE 1547-2018 via a new UL 1741 SB Certification Requirements Decision (“CRD”) in
April 2026.7 These systems are not only certified to the same standards as stationary storage
devices, but can even be the exact same models, with companies like Enphase using the same
inverter models for their residential stationary storage and forthcoming bidirectional charger
products.8 These certifications and inverter similarities ensure that bidirectional charging systems
operate with the same safety and reliability features that utilities are already very familiar with
from their processing of stationary storage and solar interconnections.
Given the similarities between these products, utilities should require similar levels of
review effort and associated costs for interconnection applications for NEM / NBT systems, non-
NEM/NBT stationary storage, and grid-parallel bidirectional charging systems. The Commission
should therefore adopt a fee structure for small bidirectional charging systems that aligns with
existing NEM interconnection application fees and directs utilities to process these projects
through comparable residential storage review pathways.
In Opening Comments, VGIC recommended that, if the Commission wishes to set the
interconnection fee for bidirectional charging systems based on the costs of installing those
systems, it should do so only after reaching a specified threshold. Specifically, VGIC
6 See: California Energy Commission V2G Equipment List
https://v2gel.energy.ca.gov/Home/ProcessView. Accessed April 13, 2026; GM Energy Inverter
Specifications. https://gmenergy.gm.com/content/dam/gmenergy/na/us/en/index/01-pdfs/gm-energy-
inverter-specifications.pdf
7 UL, Certificate Performance of Grid Interactive Equipment and Systems for Tesla, Inc.:
https://energylibrary.tesla.com/docs/Public/More/ProductCertificationInformation/Powershare_UL1741_
VoC.pdf
8 Enphase uses IQ microinverters for their stationary storage and bidirectional products. See the IQ
Bidirectional EV Charger specifications: https://enphase.com/download/iq-bidirectional-ev-charger-data-
sheet; IQ Battery 5P specifications: https://enphase.com/en-au/download/iq-battery-5p-anz
4

recommended that this shift should be triggered after surpassing 10,000 total completed small non-
NEM bidirectional charging system interconnection applications across all three IOUs.
However, given the similarities between stationary and mobile storage highlighted by
parties in Opening Comments, VGIC modifies its recommendation and instead recommends that
any reevaluation of interconnection fees occur after utilities collectively process 10,000 completed
small non-NEM energy storage interconnection applications across all three IOUs (including non-
NEM additions to NEM projects). Because bidirectional charging systems are operationally and
technologically like stationary storage systems, the utility experience processing small energy
storage interconnection applications is a more appropriate benchmark than experience limited
solely to bidirectional EV charging systems.
If interconnection fees are set equally for all types of energy storage, it will also be
important for the Commission to evaluate differences in review complexity and cost between
projects of different sizes, as highlighted by parties in Opening Comments.9 The Commission
should therefore ensure that any future fee structure appropriately reflects the actual review
burdens associated with residential-scale projects and does not impose disproportionate costs on
smaller customer-sited systems.
III. THE COMMISSION SHOULD CLARIFY THAT BACKUP-ONLY
BIDIRECTIONAL SYSTEMS AND LOAD-ONLY EV SYSTEMS WITH
DISABLED GRID-PARALLEL FEATURES ARE NOT SUBJECT TO RULE 21
INTERCONNECTION REQUIREMENTS
In Opening Comments, Ford highlighted the current confusion surrounding the
applicability of Rule 21 to systems being used solely for charging and/or backup power. As Ford
explains, the Commission has previously discussed that systems operating only for charging and/or
9 PG&E Opening Comments at 20; SEIA Opening Comments at 64-65; Tesla Opening Comments at 12-
13.
5

backup power in a break-before-make configuration are not intended to proceed through the Rule
21 interconnection process.10 Instead, backup power customers are generally expected to provide
notification to the utility that a backup generator is being installed. However, utilities currently
route these notifications through their Rule 21 portals in ways that can be difficult for customers
and installers to navigate.
Ford highlights that PG&E’s portal requires users to click through the page as if they are
submitting a Rule 21 application before selecting a “Standby Emergency Generator” option.11 SCE
similarly requires a Rule 21 application process to be initiated before users can select an “Isolated
Backup Power” option.12 Although these processes appear to function as notification pathways
rather than actual Rule 21 applications, their placement within Rule 21 interconnection portals
creates unnecessary confusion for customers and installers.
Neither PG&E nor SCE appears to be charging the $800 interconnection application fee
for these break-before-make backup power generators, and these projects do not proceed through
the Rule 21 evaluation and study process. VGIC commends the utilities for applying this
appropriate treatment. However, as Ford notes, the current structure “leaves the possibility for
customers and installers of backup power systems to inadvertently bin themselves into categories
that would improperly apply the fees and additional processes required by interconnection, which
is intended for parallel operation use cases.”13
10 Ford Opening Comments at 5-6.
11 Ford Opening Comments at 6.
12 See SCE Form 14-732:
https://edisonintl.sharepoint.com/:b:/t/Public/Misc/ER_UWBusgIlPqlrMiOJLXpAB4djEWq4hq_pVJ7hb
WEnsFw?e=RuGxTc
13 Ford Opening Comments at 7.
6

This confusion could create unnecessary barriers to the adoption of backup power and
bidirectional charging technologies by causing customers and installers to incorrectly believe they
must complete full Rule 21 interconnection processes or incur substantial fees for systems intended
solely for backup operation during outages. Clearer guidance and processes would significantly
reduce customer uncertainty, minimize administrative burdens, and support broader
deployment of electric vehicles and resiliency technologies.
Although current rules already indicate that load-only EV systems with disabled grid-
parallel features and break-before-make, backup-only systems do not need to proceed through Rule
21 interconnection review, VGIC agrees with Ford that the Commission should explicitly clarify
in this proceeding that the following systems are not required to submit Rule 21
interconnection applications or pay Rule 21 interconnection application fees: 1) load-only
EV systems that operate as load but have disabled grid-parallel features; and 2) backup
generators, including bidirectional charging systems, enabled in bidirectional mode only
when isolated from the grid.
In addition, utilities should revise and clarify their customer-facing forms and processes to
ensure that load-only EV systems with disabled grid-parallel features and backup-only systems are
clearly distinguished from systems intended to operate in parallel with the grid. Furthermore,
VGIC recommends that utilities more explicitly outline backup power notification processes on
their websites and either establish separate backup power notification portals or provide a clear
“backup power” selection option on the first page and/or initial guidance of the Rule 21 portal.
Standardized and transparent processes and guidance across all IOUs would reduce customer
confusion and help ensure that backup-only systems are not inadvertently subjected to
inappropriate interconnection requirements.
7

IV. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments on the Scoping Memo. We
look forward to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: May 29, 2026
8