4
~
L
B
U
P
~* TEX>~
Filing Receipt
Filed Date - 2026-02-27 02:32:59 PM
Control Number - 59176
Item Number - 17

DOCKET NO. 59176
PETITION OF FORD MOTOR § PUBLIC UTILITY COMMISSION
COMPANY FOR DECLARATORY §
ORDER § OF TEXAS
§
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL'S COMMENTS IN SUPPORT OF THE
PETITION FOR DECLARATORY ORDER
On December 29, 2025, Ford Motor Company ("Ford") filed a petition seeking a
declaratory order related to the interpretation of the Commission' s rule at 16 Texas Administrative
Code ("TAC") § 25.211. On February 27,2026, the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council ("VGIC")
filed and served Vehicle -G rid Integration Council 's Motion to Intervene in accordance with 16
TAC §§ 22.103 and 22.104. VGIC respectfully submits these comments in support of the Petition
for Declaratory Order ("Petition") filed by Ford on December 29,2025.
I. INTRODUCTION
1. VGIC is a national 501(c)6 member-based advocacy group committed to advancing the
role of vehicle-grid integration ("VGI") through policy development, education, and research.
VGIC aims to ensure that the value of flexible EV charging and discharging is recognized and
compensated for, thereby achieving a more reliable, affordable, and efficient electric grid.
2. VGIC supports Ford' s request for a Declaratory Order clarifying the applicability of TAC
25.211 to systems using Home Backup Power ("HBP") features.
II. COMMENTS
3. VGIC has engaged closely with automakers, utilities, third-party testing laboratories, EV
charging equipment manufacturers, vehicle-grid integration ("VGI") aggregators and service
providers, policy-makers, non-profit organizations, and academics since 2020 on the topic of
bidirectional charging systems , including through the development of its V2X Bidirectional
Page 1 of 3

Charging Systems : Best Practices for Service Connection or Interconnection. 1 Additionally , as
noted in the Petition, the Electric Power Research Institute ("EPRI") conducted laboratory
assessments confirming that the HBP features provide backup power only after the system is
properly disconnected from the grid. Based on EPRI' s investigation and VGIC' s prior
experience on this topic, the Commission granting Ford's request through a Declaratory Order
would constitute a reasonable formalization and confirmation of a practice already implemented
and, in some cases, clarified, in markets across the U. S.
4. VGIC agrees with the Petition's interpretation that the HBP feature utilizing a "break-
before-make" isolation logic does not constitute "parallel operation" and therefore should not be
subj ect to interconnection requirements. As determined by EPRI, these systems are incapable of
inadvertently back-feeding the grid during operation and therefore cannot impact power quality
or safety.
5. VGIC is concerned by the Petition's report that at least one distribution utility in Texas
requires customers with HBP systems to navigate complex, time-consuming interconnection
processes designed for grid-parallel distributed generation. Subjecting HBP systems to these
procedures creates a significant and unjustified barrier to market development, imposing an
administrative burden on customers without providing any grid safety benefit.
6. Lastly, VGIC notes that granting this Petition would align Texas with other regulatory
jurisdictions. For example, the Michigan Public Service Commission recently issued a
declaratory ruling finding that Ford' s HBP feature does not require interconnection authorization
because it prevents parallel operation. Building this type of consistency across jurisdictions is
1 V2X Bidirectional Charging Systems: Best Practices for Service Connection or Interconnection. August 2022.
https://www.vgicouncil.org/s/VGIC-Special-Initiative-2022.pdf
Page 2 of 3

critical to reducing friction in the relatively nascent VGI solutions market, ensuring EVs remain
a valuable, safe, and relatively inexpensive backup power option for Texans.
III. CONCLUSION
VGIC respectfully requests that the Commission grant Ford's Petition, affirming that its
isolated backup systems do not trigger interconnection requirements.
Respectfully submitted,
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
/s/ Zach Woopen
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
zwoogen@vgicouncil.org
1401 21St St., Suite 5409
Sacramento, California 95811
(279) 895-7855
CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE
I hereby certify that a true and correct copy of these comments was served via electronic
mail on all parties of record in this proceeding on this 27~h day of February, 2026, in accordance
with the Commission's Second Order Suspending Rules in Project No. 50664.
is/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
Page 3 of 3