BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
FILED
04/30/26
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Update Rulemaking 25-08-004
04:59 PM
Distribution Level Interconnection (Filed August 14, 2025)
R2508004
Rules and Regulations.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE
ASSIGNED COMMISSIONER’S SCOPING MEMO AND RULING
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
1401 21st St., Suite 5409
Sacramento, California 95811
Telephone: (279) 895-7855
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
Grace Pratt
Caliber Strategies
801 K Street, Suite 2800
Sacramento, CA 95814
Telephone: (818) 264-6437
Email: grace@caliberstrat.com
Date: April 30, 2026

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Order Instituting Rulemaking to Update Rulemaking 25-08-004
Distribution Level Interconnection (Filed August 14, 2025)
Rules and Regulations.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE
ASSIGNED COMMISSIONER’S SCOPING MEMO AND RULING
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) hereby submits
these comments on the Assigned Commissioner’s Scoping Memo and Ruling (“Scoping Memo”),
issued by President Alice Reynolds on March 3, 2026, as modified by the Email Ruling Granting
Extension for Comments, Motion to Late File NOI, and Motions for Party Status issued by
Administrative Law Judge Andrew Dugowson.
I. INTRODUCTION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide comments in response to the Scoping Memo
regarding the update to distribution-level interconnection rules and regulations and, specifically,
to address the questions in Appendix A. VGIC strongly supports the Commission’s intent to
modernize Rule 21 and to ensure that interconnection timelines and application fees remain
efficient, transparent, affordable, and equitable as California transitions to greater use of
distributed energy resources (“DER”). VGIC commends Energy Division staff and the
Commission for prioritizing the critical issue of interconnection application fees for small non-
NEM customers, as the current fee has an outsized impact on the emerging small bidirectional
charging system market. Accordingly, VGIC offers several recommendations in response to the
Scoping Memo questions.
1

II. INTERCONNECTION TIMELINE QUESTIONS
1. Should the Commission take measures to modify the interconnection [timeline] rules and
requirements established for IOUs’ in D.20-09-035? If so, what measures do you
recommend? Include in your response answers to the following questions:
i. Are the timelines in D.20-09-035 reasonable? What data or information are
available to support whether they are or are not reasonable?
VGIC does not have a position on this topic at this time but may provide additional
information in reply comments.
ii. Should the Commission modify the benchmarks, timelines, metrics and reports
established by D.20-09- 035, Ordering Paragraph (OP) 22? If yes, describe why
the modifications are reasonable and how they protect ratepayers and support
California’s climate goals.
Yes. Specifically, the Commission should direct the IOUs to modify the
“Technology Types” listed in their D.20-09-035 OP 22 quarterly interconnection timeline
reports to include clear identifiers for DC Bidirectional Charging Systems, AC
Bidirectional Charging Systems, and combinations of DER pairings with these systems
(e.g., V2X DC + Solar PV, V2X AC + Storage, V2X DC + Solar + Storage, etc.). D.20-
09-035 OP 22 details the timelines and metrics that the IOUs must report on, and OP 28
details that all systems other than NEM systems <30 kW shall be subject to interconnection
timeline targets (and, subsequently, the quarterly timelines reporting directed in OP 22).
However, neither OP 22 nor OP 28 considers the “Technology Types” data field to be
collected and reported for each interconnection request. Currently, IOUs apply unclear
treatment for certain technology types in their quarterly interconnection timeline reports.
For example, PG&E’s latest report identifies some projects as “Storage – EVSE” or
2

“Storage – EV.”1 Presumably, these identify DC and AC bidirectional charging systems,
although, based on VGIC’s interpretation of the reporting materials, that is not explicitly
defined. Meanwhile, the latest aggregated report lists only “Battery Storage” and “Solar
PV & Battery Storage.” Presumably, the many “Storage – EVSE” sites identified in
PG&E’s latest report or the “Electric Vehicle-to-X– DC” identifier used in SCE’s latest
report are accounted for as “Battery Storage” in the latest aggregated report. However, this,
too, is not detailed. For those seeking to understand the interconnection timelines facing
bidirectional charging customers, these inconsistencies – namely, grouping bidirectional
charging systems in with all other reported energy storage systems – greatly limit the
usefulness of this reporting. If the Commission, Energy Division staff, the IOUs
themselves, VGIC, or another stakeholder were seeking transparent information on how
long it has taken to interconnect all or a subset of bidirectional charging system
configurations (i.e., to recommend future enhancements to interconnection rules and
processes), it would be challenging to identify differences or determine which steps pose
the primary obstacles. VGIC posits that this will not be considered a major revision by
IOUs and does not anticipate it will be a contested issue among the parties. Further, VGIC
does not aim to create any needless friction or undue burden in an already rather onerous
portfolio of IOU reporting. Nonetheless, we respectfully urge the Commission to direct
utilities to clearly detail and delineate DC and AC bidirectional charging systems in the
“Technology Types” field of both their individual and consolidated reporting to make the
data useful to stakeholders. For example, the following terms could be used:
• DC Bidirectional Charging System
o DC Bidirectional Charging System – PV
1 See e.g., PG&E Interconnection Timeline Report Q4 2025, January 30, 2026.
3

o DC Bidirectional Charging System – Storage
o DC Bidirectional Charging System – PV, Storage
• AC Bidirectional Charging System
o AC Bidirectional Charging System – PV
o AC Bidirectional Charging System – Storage
o AC Bidirectional Charging System – PV, Storage
Alternatively, the terms “DC Bidirectional Charging System” and “AC Bidirectional
Charging System” could appear as “Storage – EVSE” and “Storage – EV”, as PG&E
already provides. Another alternative could be to use the terms “Electric Vehicle-to-X–
DC” and “Electric Vehicle-to-X– AC”, which appear in SCE’s reporting.2 Ultimately,
VGIC does not have a preference regarding whether all three IOUs use the same
language, but rather that they all provide a clear, easily interpretable indication so
that the Commission, Energy Division staff, the IOUs themselves, and other parties
can make use of the data.
iii. Should the Commission update the list of projects eligible for the timelines? What
type of projects and/or resources (e.g., projects with deliverability and power
purchase agreements with load serving entities) should be eligible for the
timelines?
D.20-09-035 OP 28 details that systems other than <30 kW NEM systems are
currently eligible for the timelines and, subsequently, the quarterly timeline reporting.
Based on VGIC’s understanding, most bidirectional charging customers are, therefore,
already eligible for timelines and associated reporting. However, it is unclear whether
bidirectional charging systems that are taking service and interconnecting under the Net
Energy Metering Multiple Tariff (“NEM-MT”) are eligible for timelines and associated
reporting. Based on our interpretation of the quarterly interconnection reporting, it appears
2 SCE uses the phrasing “Electric Vehicle-to-X– DC” and “Electric Vehicle-to-X– AC” in its quarterly reporting.
4

that NEM-MT sites above 30 kW are listed, but those under 30 kW are not.3 VGIC
therefore requests the Commission clarify that bidirectional charging sites taking
service under NEM-MT, regardless of size, are eligible for timelines and reporting.
Similar to the recommendation in response to question 1.ii above, VGIC believes that
enhanced reporting on bidirectional charging systems will significantly improve
stakeholders’ ability to understand the areas of friction across various bidirectional
charging configurations and, in turn, support sound policymaking. VGIC estimates roughly
50-70% of early adopters of bidirectional charging systems will also have a rooftop solar
system and, as a result, NEM-MT installations may become increasingly common for these
customers.
iv. Should the Commission consider the proposals in party comments to add
additional timelines? If so, what data should the utilities use to determine the
timelines? What type of projects would require this work?
VGIC does not have a position on this topic at this time but may provide additional
information in reply comments.
v. Should the Commission re-consider how the 95% compliance benchmark set by
D.20-09-035, OP 28 is evaluated? Are there alternative compliance benchmarks
or mechanisms the Commission should consider to supplement and/or replace the
95% compliance benchmark?
VGIC does not have a position on this topic at this time but may provide additional
information in reply comments.
3 California Public Utilities Commission. Electric Rule 21: Generating Facility Interconnections. Rule 21
Interconnection Timeline Reporting. All IOUs – R21 Timelines Report. https://www.cpuc.ca.gov/Rule21/. Accessed
April 28, 2026. https://www.cpuc.ca.gov/-/media/cpuc-website/divisions/energy-division/documents/rule21/all_ious-
r21timelinesreport_202204.xlsx
5

vi. How could the overall timelines compliance and reporting process be simplified
and improved?
VGIC generally supports simplifying and improving the compliance and reporting
process. However, this must be balanced with the need to maintain transparency such that
reporting can effectively inform policymaking. At a minimum, VGIC believes that the
compliance and reporting process must functionally support a stakeholder in identifying
the areas of friction in the interconnection process for different technology types (including
DC Bidirectional Charging Systems, AC Bidirectional Charging Systems, and either of
these configurations paired with other DER(s)), site sizes, and tariffs (e.g., NEM-MT vs
non-NEM). This identification could conceivably be accomplished through a process
simpler than the one currently in place. VGIC looks forward to further collaboration with
the Commission and stakeholders on any efforts to simplify and streamline timelines
reporting without compromising its usefulness.
vii. Should the Commission adopt any of the proposals presented by parties for
timeline compliance mechanisms? If so, provide a detailed description of how the
proposal should be implemented. What are the drawbacks and merits of the
proposals provided?
VGIC does not have a position on this topic at this time but may provide additional
information in reply comments.
III. INTERCONNECTION FEE QUESTIONS.
1. Utilities currently charge all non-NEM resources a flat interconnection fee of $800,
regardless of the size or type of resource. The IOUs also, under certain circumstances,
conduct and charge the applicant a fee for a Supplemental Review.
6

2. The IOUs shall, and other parties may, address the following question: What are the costs
associated with interconnecting non-NEM resources? Does the current $800
interconnection fee cover these costs? If the costs vary based on certain characteristics
(e.g., generating technology or project size), separate your responses into the appropriate
buckets. If the data are not available, what steps are necessary to collect this data?
VGIC does not have cost data for non-NEM systems beyond what utilities currently report.
However, VGIC recommends that the utilities provide interconnection cost data broken down by
project size as follows: systems < 30 kW, 30 kW – 1 MW, and > 1 MW. Based on the Q2 2025
Interconnection Discussion Forum, the relative complexity of interconnection applications (and
therefore processing costs) appears to be directly correlated with project size. Therefore, if the
utilities do not provide costs broken down by project size, the Commission should seek to quickly
enable the collection of this data.
3. Should the Commission order utilities to update the interconnection fees?
Yes, as VGIC has discussed in this proceeding and prior venues (e.g., Interconnection
Discussion Forum), the California IOUs have the highest interconnection application fee for small
non-NEM systems in the country. The $800 fee was set in a decision over two decades ago and
warrants an update. The Commission has acknowledged that this update is needed, including in
the previous Rule 21 proceeding (R.17-07-007), and the time to address this issue is now. Further
delay risks significantly restricting California's ability to leverage small non-NEM systems,
including bidirectional charging solutions, to support the grid. The Commission’s substantial
investments in dynamic rate pilots, emergency reliability programs, V2X Pilots, and related efforts
to unlock bidirectional charging solutions and other small non-NEM DERs have collectively
tapped hundreds of millions of dollars in ratepayer funds. These efforts are directly and severely
undercut by the exceedingly high interconnection application fee for small non-NEM systems.
Notably, today’s non-NEM bidirectional charging systems are similar in size to and leverage the
7

same UL safety standards as small NEM systems. In some cases, the same inverter model is even
deployed for both emerging small non-NEM bidirectional charging products and actively-
deployed, interconnected small NEM systems.
i. If so, how should the Commission order to calculate the new fee schedules, and what
data are necessary to calculate those fees?
VGIC posits that the IOUs do not yet have sufficient cost data on interconnecting small,
non-NEM bidirectional charging systems to support the calculation of a new fee schedule for
these systems. In the long term, the IOUs should closely track this cost data, file a joint report
in this or a successor interconnection proceeding (on which the Assigned Commissioner or
ALJ should request party comments), and then, via joint Advice Letter, request a new
interconnection application fee for small non-NEM systems. The report, comment period, and
subsequent Advice Letter should be triggered by surpassing 10,000 total completed small non-
NEM bidirectional charging system interconnection applications across all three IOUs, as
reported in D.20-09-035 OP 22 reports.
In the interim, VGIC strongly recommends that the Commission set the
interconnection application fee for small non-NEM bidirectional charging systems equal
to the interconnection fee currently in place for small NEM systems. VGIC believes this
interim approach is reasonable, as it avoids overly penalizing customers engaging in the
relatively nascent bidirectional charging market. This proposal also offers a built-in risk-
containment mechanism, as only the first approximately 10,000 customers would receive this
treatment.
ii. Should the Commission order utilities to charge fees that more closely represents the
actual cost of a given application?
8

VGIC believes it is ideal for utilities to have application fees that more closely reflect
the actual costs of reviewing these applications. However, these fees should also be reasonable
and predictable for customers, and newer technologies should not be overly penalized. For
example, the IOUs have processed only a handful of Rule 21 applications for bidirectional
charging systems in the last few years, and only in 2025-2026 have residential bidirectional
charging systems received Permission to Operate.4 Given that small, non-NEM bidirectional
charging systems are a relatively nascent market, the time and costs for application review may
be higher than they will be once the utilities gain familiarity and expertise with bidirectional
charging systems. VGIC anticipates that this can happen relatively quickly, since bidirectional
charging systems are similar to stationary storage devices (as outlined extensively by the
Commission in D.20-09-035), but these early deployments should not be overly penalized.
Therefore, VGIC does not believe that, in the long term, application fees should differ between
technology types. Instead, all projects of similar size should eventually pay the same
application fee, even if other interim approaches are used until the Commission can confirm,
through IOU reporting, that the application review costs are, in fact, similar across these
projects.
IV. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments on the Scoping Memo. We
look forward to further collaboration with the Commission and stakeholders on this initiative.
4 See e.g., PG&E Interconnection Timeline Report Q4 2025, January 30, 2026.
9

Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: April 30, 2026
10