BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Application of Southern California
Edison Company (U 338-E) to Application 24-03-019
Establish Marginal Costs, Allocate (Filed March 29, 2024)
Revenues, and Design Rates.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE
PROPOSED DECISION REGARDING SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EDISON
COMPANY’S APPLICATION TO ESTABLISH MARGINAL COSTS, ALLOCATE
REVENUES AND DESIGN RATES
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
1401 21st St., Suite 5409
Sacramento, California 95811
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
Grace Pratt
Caliber Strategies
801 K Street, Suite 2800
Sacramento, CA 95814
Telephone: (818) 264-6437
Email: grace@caliberstrat.com
Date: April 9, 2026

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Application of Southern California
Edison Company (U 338-E) to Application 24-03-019
Establish Marginal Costs, Allocate (Filed March 29, 2024)
Revenues, and Design Rates.
COMMENTS OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL ON THE
PROPOSED DECISION REGARDING SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EDISON
COMPANY’S APPLICATION TO ESTABLISH MARGINAL COSTS, ALLOCATE
REVENUES AND DESIGN RATES
In accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Public Utilities
Commission (“Commission”), the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) hereby submits
these opening comments on the Proposed Decision Regarding Southern California Edison
Company’s Application to Establish Marginal Costs, Allocate Revenues and Design Rates
(“Proposed Decision” or “PD”), issued by Administrative Law Judge Marcelo Poirier on March
20, 2026.
I. INTRODUCTION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit these comments on the PD. VGIC has also
signed on to comments by the Joint Parties of the Vehicle-to-Grid Resource Proposal (“VGRP”)
Settlement, Southern California Edison (“SCE”), CALSTART, Inc., Small Business Utility
Advocates, Solar Energy Industries Association (“SEIA”), and VGIC (collectively, VGRP
Parties). The Proposed Decision errs in rejecting the VGRP Settlement agreement, and VGIC
recommends that the Commission approve the settlement as consistent with the law, reasonable in
light of the whole record, and in the public interest. The Comments of the VGRP Parties discuss
the reasonableness of the settlement agreement.
1

VGIC submits these comments specifically on the risk of not adopting VGRP. With this
decision, the Commission is sending the signal to industry and broader stakeholders that California
does not want bidirectional charging systems to export to the grid or participate in grid services.
This message means that the bidirectional charging industry and customer offerings will
work towards serving only the needs of bidirectional charging customers, leaving benefits
for broader Californians and ratepayers unrealized and potentially exacerbating cost shift
concerns.
II. THE COMMISSION MUST ENABLE GRID-INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES THAT
ENCOURAGE CUSTOMERS TO CONTRIBUTE TO THE GRID.
VGRP represents a necessary and timely response to the rapidly advancing bidirectional
charging ecosystem. Every day, additional vehicles are sold in California with grid-parallel
bidirectional charging features, including 24 models on the market today from 14 automotive
brands, with four additional models from four more automakers announced for upcoming release.
In total, VGIC estimates that there are 215,465 light-duty vehicles and 1,890 electric school buses
in California that offer bidirectional charging features. Assuming SCE contains 33% of the state’s
EVs, an estimated 71,727 such vehicles may already be in SCE’s service territory.1
These vehicles represent a substantial and growing grid resource. The California Energy
Commission (“CEC”) notes an average light-duty EV battery exceeds 80 kWh 2 and a resulting
approximately 18.5 GW of aggregate battery capacity statewide, surpassing California’s installed
1 Prepared Testimony of Sylvie Ashford Addressing Southern California Edison’s Test Year 2025 General
Rate Case Load Growth Investments. A.23-05-010. TURN-07. Page 11-13.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/SupDoc/A2305010/7090/526146968.pdf
2 California Energy Commission. A Roadmap to Unlocking the Benefits of Bidirectional Charging. March
2026. Page 2. https://efiling.energy.ca.gov/GetDocument.aspx?tn=268952&DocumentContentId=106145
2

stationary storage capacity. 3 The CEC’s report estimates that bidirectional discharge can provide
approximately three times the value of unidirectional managed charging.4 This scale underscores
both the immediacy and magnitude of the opportunity.
Given this untapped potential, customers will seek safe ways to use these assets for
their benefit. It is therefore critical that the Commission establish pathways that enable these
resources to contribute to grid needs. The Proposed Decision suggests that additional evidence
is required regarding “customer preferences and behaviors regarding export rates.” 5 However,
SCE has already surveyed customers and provided empirical evidence of customer acceptance and
appetite for “V2G energy exports,” with 81% of SCE’s surveyed customers expressing at least “a
little interested” and 16% of customers stating they are “very interested.”6 The CEC has also
released updated data from 2025 showing that customers are willing to enroll in a bidirectional
charging program, with 35% stating that they would be “Very Likely” to enroll in a program and
an additional 34% stating that they would be “Likely” to enroll.
Absent export opportunities or participation in grid service programs, customers are
likely to use these vehicles solely to meet onsite needs. The CEC’s Roadmap anticipates this
outcome, noting that customers can prioritize vehicle-to-home (“V2H”) applications to offset
consumption during peak time-of-use periods, potentially through systems voluntarily islanded
from the grid. 7 While such use cases can provide benefits, including an estimated 5 GW reduction
3 California Energy Commission. A Roadmap to Unlocking the Benefits of Bidirectional Charging. March
2026. Page 2. https://efiling.energy.ca.gov/GetDocument.aspx?tn=268952&DocumentContentId=106145
4 Ibid at 3.
5 PD at 45.
6 SCE, Phase 2 of 2025 General Rate Case Amended Rate Design Proposals (SCE-04A) at p. 125, lines
10-16, served to A.24-03-019 on August 26, 2024.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/SupDoc/A2403019/7663/538693971.pdf
7 The CEC roadmap refers to these systems as “grid disconnected.”
3

in residential peak load by 2030, these systems may operate disconnected from the grid and
therefore limit broader system value.
This trajectory risks pushing customers to maximize private benefits rather than aligning
their behavior with system needs. While V2H applications may occasionally coincide with grid
benefits, they are unlikely to consistently deliver optimized system outcomes. Customers acting
independently will not necessarily discharge at times of highest grid value, nor will they support
load shaping in a way that reduces overall system costs.
VGIC is particularly concerned that this dynamic could lead to unintended cost shifts. In
studies on the benefits of electrification, increased grid consumption during off-peak times reduces
rates for all Californians.8 Shaping increased load, therefore, becomes important to maximize
ratepayer savings, but simply removing significant overall load from the system does not address
California’s affordability crisis and could lead to cost shifts among customers.
In the absence of export compensation or clear grid-participation signals, technology
providers may increasingly design products for self-consumption or grid-disconnected use
cases. Early generations of bidirectional charging solutions are already marketed primarily for
grid-isolated backup power. Technology development cycles are occurring now for products that
will be deployed over the next three to five years. Without clear policy direction, these systems
are likely to be optimized for customer-only use, including daily cycling for time-of-use arbitrage
and elective islanding, even under “blue sky” or normal operating conditions.
8 The Public Advocates Office. Abishek, Benjamin Hoffman, Leo Steinmetz, and Richard Khoe.
Distribution Grid Electrification Model 2025. https://www.publicadvocates.cpuc.ca.gov/-/media/cal-
advocates-website/files/presentations/251030-public-advocates-office-dgem-2025-slides.pdf
4

To avoid this outcome, the Commission should approve VGRP and establish a framework
that encourages bidirectional charging systems to remain connected to, and actively support, the
grid. Providing a pathway for export and grid services will help align customer incentives with
system needs, unlock the full value of these distributed resources, and ensure that benefits are
shared across all ratepayers.
VGIC reiterates that, in the case of rejecting VGRP, there is an immense ratepayer
cost of inaction, as this misstep will directly lead to greater development and deployment of
very large home batteries (in the form of 80kWh/11kW bidirectional charging systems) that
support grid defection and reduced utility revenue from these customers, directly
undermining the Commission’s affordability goals.
III. THERE ARE NO OTHER EXPORT OPPORTUNITIES FOR BIDIRECTIONAL
CHARGING SYSTEMS IN SCE SERVICE TERRITORY AFTER 2027.
Presently, there are very limited opportunities for bidirectional charging systems to provide
value to the grid through exports in SCE’s service territory. The only currently available programs
are the Emergency Load Reduction Program (“ELRP”), which is scheduled to sunset after 2027,
and the Demand Side Grid Support Program (“DSGS”), which appears unlikely to continue
beyond this year. As a result, absent further Commission action, bidirectional charging systems
will effectively have no pathway to provide grid services after 2027. VGRP is designed to launch
as ELRP phases out, providing a critical bridge that enables customers to continue providing grid
services.
The PD also references arguments from the Cal Advocates suggesting that dynamic rates
could serve as an alternative to VGRP for compensating EV exports. While VGIC agrees that
dynamic rates are an important tool for advancing VGI, these rates remain nascent and will require
5

significant time to scale to broad customer adoption. Importantly, SCE’s existing dynamic rate
pilot does not permit exports, and SCE has not proposed export compensation in its current
dynamic rate application. In its 2025 decision on Load Management Standard-compliant rates,
the Commission declined to direct the large investor-owned utilities to include export
compensation in their forthcoming dynamic rate applications. As a result, SCE identified
VGRP in its dynamic rate application as the appropriate mechanism to compensate bidirectional
charging system exports, both of which rely on the Avoided Cost Calculator to reflect marginal
system value.
Dynamic rates also introduce a level of complexity that limits near-term customer
participation. There is no evidence in the record of this proceeding demonstrating that customers
are interested in or prepared to enroll in dynamic export rates. While Pacific Gas and Electric
Company (“PG&E”) has implemented dynamic export rates for bidirectional charging customers
through its VGI pilots and Hourly Flex Pricing pilot, customer uptake has been limited, and no
residential customers have participated in the dynamic rate or dynamic export compensation
component of these pilots.9 This is the case even where PG&E has paired these rates with direct
incentives for bidirectional equipment, an approach SCE has not yet implemented.
Even if the Commission were to direct SCE to develop a dynamic export rate today,
substantial time would be required to design, approve, and operationalize such a tariff. As a
practical matter, this timeline would extend beyond the expiration of ELRP in 2027, leaving
bidirectional charging customers without any viable program or compensation mechanism to
provide grid services.
9 California Public Utilities Commission. VGI Policy, Pilots, and Technology Enablement: VGI Forum
2026 Event Recording. At 04:01-04:04. https://www.cpuc.ca.gov/industries-and-topics/electrical-
energy/infrastructure/transportation-electrification/vehicle-grid-integration-activities
6

In contrast, the Commission could adopt VGRP to provide direct grid benefits today. As
discussed by comments from the Joint Settling Parties, the settlement agreement and time-varying
export rates based on the Avoided Cost Calculator (ACC) will provide benefits in line with
California’s affordability goals.
IV. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments on the Proposed Decision.
Given the record of this proceeding, the Commission should adopt the VGRP Settlement
Agreement.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: April 9, 2026
7