Docket No. 25-00008-UT
BEFORE THE NEW MEXICO PUBLIC REGULATION COMMISSION
IN THE MATTER OF THE POTENTIAL )
ADOPTION OF AN INTERCONNECTION RULE ) Docket No. 25-00008-UT
APPLICABLE TO RURAL ELECTRIC )
COOPERATIVES
INITIAL COMMENTS OF VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
ON PROPOSED RULE 17.9.575 NMAC
Filed: April 13, 2026
I. INTRODUCTION AND INTEREST OF VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION
COUNCIL
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”)1 respectfully provides its comments in to the
Commission’s Order Issuing Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, filed February 13, 2026, proposing
the adoption of a new interconnection rule at 17.9.575 NMAC applicable to rural electric
cooperatives (“Proposed Rule”) and corresponding amendments to the existing interconnection
rule at 17.9.568 NMAC. VGIC is a 501(c)(6) membership-based advocacy group committed to
advancing the role of vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”) through policy development, education,
outreach, and research. VGIC works to ensure that the value of flexible EV charging and
discharging is recognized and compensated for, thereby achieving a more reliable, affordable, and
efficient electric grid.
II. VGIC OPPOSES THE BLANKET EXCLUSION OF BIDIRECTIONAL
CHARGING SYSTEMS FROM THE PROPOSED RULE
a. The Proposed Rule offers no technical or safety justification for this
exclusion.
VGIC recognizes that the core purpose of interconnection rules and procedures is to protect the
safety and reliability of the grid and line workers, a goal we agree is imperative. We also
1 VGIC member companies and supporters include American Honda Motor Co., Inc., Ford Motor Company,
General Motors, Nissan Group of North America, Bidirectional Energy, BMW of North America, BodeEV,
ChargePoint, ChargeScape, Codibly, Critical Loop, dcbel, Eaton Corporation, EnergyHub, EV.Energy, Fermata
Energy, Gravity, Mercedes-Benz USA, Orange Charger, Renew Home, Rivian, Stellantis N.V., SWTCH Energy,
Tesla, The Mobility House, Toyota Motor North America, Inc., UL Solutions, WeaveGrid, Clean Power Alliance,
Connecticut Green Bank, Los Angeles Department of Water & Power, MCE Community Choice Energy, San Diego
Community Power, and Sacramento Municipal Utility District. The views expressed in these Comments are those of
VGIC, and do not necessarily reflect the views of all individual VGIC member companies or supporters.
(https://www.vgicouncil.org/)
1

Docket No. 25-00008-UT
acknowledge that, as a relatively new commercially available solution, bidirectional charging
solutions may not be familiar to utilities. However, bidirectional charging systems that operate in
bidirectional mode when connected to the grid (i.e., those typically subject to utility
interconnection processes) are designed and certified to the same underlying distributed energy
resource (“DER”) grid safety and interoperability requirements referenced in the Proposed Rule
for other DERs. Specifically, today’s grid-parallel bidirectional charging equipment demonstrates
conformance to IEEE 1547-2018 through certification to UL 1741 Supplement B (“SB”). The Ford
Charge Station Pro + Sunrun Home Integration Kit, GM Energy PowerShift Charge + V2H
Enablement Kit, dcbel Ara, Wallbox Quasar 2, Nuvve TP-60DC-V2G-H1-C, Nuvve TP-40DC-
V2G-H1-C, Nuvve TP-20DC-V2G-H1-C, InCharge Energy ICE-22-V2X, InCharge Energy ICE-
44-V2X, Tellus Power TP-V2G-60-480, Tellus Power TP-V2G-40-480, Tellus Power TP-V2G-
30-480, and Tellus Power TP-V2G-20-480 bidirectional charging systems are all certified to UL
1741 SB.2 In addition, the Tesla Powershare Grid Support system, leveraging the Tesla Universal
Wall Connector, is expected to meet IEEE 1547-2018 via a new UL 1741 SB Certification
Requirements Decision (“CRD”) in April, 2026.3
The compliance of bidirectional charging systems with IEEE 1547-2018 and UL 1741 SB is
relevant because these standards are referenced in the Proposed Rule itself as the underlying safety
and reliability requirements for interconnection. As the Proposed Rule does not provide any safety
or reliability justification for excluding bidirectional charging systems from interconnection, it is
unreasonable to disallow certain UL 1741 SB-certified DERs from interconnecting while allowing
others to do so. In some cases, the UL 1741 SB-certified equipment is the very same models used
in stationary battery storage and/or rooftop solar systems.
b. The Proposed Rule is inconsistent with national practices and precedent.
Although bidirectional charging systems are relatively new, several utilities and states have
moved these systems through a simple interconnection process and provided permission to
operate. The World Resources Institute estimates that electric school bus bidirectional charging
alone has been enacted in 26 utility service territories across 19 states.4 With this deployment,
utilities and utility commissions are working to clarify that bidirectional charging systems are
subject to the same underlying interconnection requirements and processes (i.e., UL 1741 SB
2 See: California Energy Commission V2G Equipment List https://v2gel.energy.ca.gov/Home/ProcessView.
Accessed April 13, 2026; GM Energy Inverter Specifications.
https://gmenergy.gm.com/content/dam/gmenergy/na/us/en/index/01-pdfs/gm-energy-inverter-specifications.pdf.
Version 5.2-12/2025; Opening Brief of Ford Motor Company. Colorado Public Utilities Commission Proceeding
No. 25D-0536E. April 2, 2026. Page 22. https://www.dora.state.co.us/pls/efi/EFI_Search_UI.search
3 Tesla. Powershare Bi-directional EV Charging. 2026 California Public Utilities Commission’s Annual Vehicle-
Grid Integration Forum. https://www.cpuc.ca.gov/industries-and-topics/electrical-
energy/infrastructure/transportation-electrification/vehicle-grid-integration-activities. Event Recording at 1:56:41.
4 Robert Stafford. Latest Lessons From Electric School Bus Vehicle-to-Grid Programs. May 13, 2025. World
Resources Institute. https://www.wri.org/update/electric-school-bus-v2g-lessons-examples
2

Docket No. 25-00008-UT
certification). For example, the Public Utilities Commission of Nevada is currently considering
NV Energy’s proposed update to its interconnection rules, which include clarifying the treatment
for bidirectional charging systems.5 Texas, Maryland, California, Connecticut, Colorado,
Massachusetts, and New York have or are similarly addressing the interconnection of
bidirectional charging systems.6 Notably, none of these other states or utilities have adopted or
proposed a blanket exclusion of bidirectional charging systems from interconnection rules. VGIC
is not aware of any established precedent categorically prohibiting bidirectional charging
systems that comply with IEEE 1547 from being subject to interconnection rules and regulations.
III. VGIC RECOMMENDS SIMPLE, EASY-TO-IMPLEMENT GUIDELINES
FOR INCORPORATING BIDIRECTIONAL CHARGING SYSTEMS INTO
THE PROPOSED RULE.
VGIC recommends easily implementable best practices we’ve observed across the U.S. to
provide clear, consistent pathways to safely and reliably interconnect both types of bidirectional
charging systems: Direct Current (“DC” – where the inverter is offboard the vehicle) and
Alternating Current (“AC” – where the power conversion takes place onboard the vehicle). The
former is most common today, with available products from Ford, General Motors, Nissan,
Volvo, Polestar, Kia, dcbel, Wallbox, BlueBird, Thomas Built, RIDE, Nuvve, Heliox, InCharge,
and Tellus Power Green. The latter is less common, but emerging, with available products from
Tesla and likely other solution providers soon. VGIC respectfully urges the Commission to revise
the Proposed Rule as follows:
a. Define Bidirectional Charging Systems as “a combination of hardware and
software in or around the charger and electric vehicle for the purposes of
communication with and programmed flow of energy into and out of the vehicle
battery in support of electrical loads or systems offboard the EV, including the
electric grid.” This definition comprehensively encompasses both DC and AC
systems, without being overly prescriptive as to the use case for which these
systems will be enabled.
b. Clarify that bidirectional charging systems shall not be enabled for grid-parallel
bidirectional charging without first receiving permission to operate from the
utility.
5 See PUCN Docket No. 25-12031.
6 See TX PUC Project No. 54233, MD PSC Rulemaking 87, CA PUC D.20-09-035 in R.17-07-007, CT PURA
Docket No. 25-08-05, CO PUC Proceeding No. 25D-0536E, National Grid MA Interconnection Documents, NY
Joint Utilities EV Configuration Decision Tree.
3

Docket No. 25-00008-UT
c. Clarify that bidirectional charging systems without enabled bidirectional charging
features should not be directed to move through an interconnection review and
study process.
d. Adopt that, for the purposes of interconnection, a bidirectional charging system
with bidirectional charging features enabled is an energy storage system. This is
consistent with best practices that VGIC has observed in other utility service
territories and states. This avoids the need to entirely “reinvent the wheel” for
bidirectional charging systems and instead leverages the years of experience that
utilities, installers, and solution providers have gained working with the same
underlying safety and reliability standards for inverters (i.e., IEEE 1547-2018 and
UL 1741).
e. Establish a clear pathway (i.e., an interconnection form) for DC bidirectional
charging systems that meet IEEE 1547-2018 via UL 1741 SB certification.
f. Establishes two pathways for AC bidirectional charging systems, in recognition
that both are capable of ensuring safety and reliability but the market has not yet
coalesced around a single pathway. These two pathways for AC interconnection
are suited for different use cases. Specifically, a UL 1741 SC Pathway can
support multiple EVs being used at a certified charging station, whereas a UL
1741 SB CRD for DER Systems can support only a single defined EV used as
part of a certified bidirectional charging system, for example, in a single-family
home context.
VGIC believes these modifications are reasonable and appropriate, and we recommend the
Proposed Rule be adapted to include these considerations, rather than the unjustified, blanket
prohibition on bidirectional charging systems.
Establishing these rules is important for expanding safe and reliable access to available VGI
technology, which will lead to significant benefits for participating customers and reduce cost
impacts on the grid and, in turn, all customers.
III. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to provide comments and looks forward to further
collaboration with stakeholders on this important initiative.
4

Docket No. 25-00008-UT
Zach Woogen
Interim Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
5