May 1, 2026
New York State Joint Utilities c/o
Constantine Spanos, Con Edison
Rick Abraham, National Grid
RE: Comments of Vehicle Grid Integration Council on New York Joint Utilities’ EV
Configuration Decision Tree
The Vehicle Grid Integration Council (VGIC) appreciates the opportunity to share comments on
the New York State Joint Utilities EV Configuration Decision Tree (Decision Tree) for light-
duty vehicles and residential DERs 50 kW or less. It is our understanding that the decision tree
was developed through discussions at the Interconnection Technical Working Group (ITWG) as
a classification tool for determining whether new electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE)
installations are subject to Standardized Interconnection Requirements (SIR) and distributed
energy resource (DER) interconnection review.
The top-level branch of the decision tree appears to distinguish between new EVSE “connection
type” as either load-only or bidirectional. The next level for the bidirectional EVSE branch
indicates that an interconnection application is required. Only those bidirectional EVSE devices
that have the latest UL 1741 SB certification in compliance with IEEE 1547-2018 meet the SIR
and thus proceed through the interconnection review.
The Decision Tree does not recognize two common classes of bidirectional charging systems.
The first are systems that are designed and deployed to operate in bidirectional mode only
when islanded from the grid. These “break-before-make” systems incorporate robustly
engineered, industry-standard protections using either a microgrid interconnection device (MID)
or an automatic transfer switch (ATS) to prevent bidirectional charging unless the site is
electrically isolated from the grid.
An ATS or MID makes unauthorized back-feeding physically and programmatically impossible.
While connected to the grid, these bidirectional charging systems operate strictly as
unidirectional charging systems. Because a MID provides the exact same “break-before-make”
isolation as a conventional ATS, if utilities trust an ATS to safely isolate a fossil-fuel home
standby generator, there is no technical justification to treat a MID differently. These systems do
not operate in bidirectional mode when in parallel with the grid and, therefore, do not present an
1

inadvertent backfeed risk. These systems should not be directed to proceed through the SIR
study process1 because “distributed generation or energy storage systems neither designed to
operate, nor operating, in parallel with the utility’s electrical systems are not subject to these
requirements”; instead, they should be subject to existing processes for residential standby
generators. If the existing requirements for residential standby generators are not sufficient, those
requirements for standby generators should be updated for all standby generators (e.g., gas,
diesel, etc.), rather than singling out a specific backup generator technology (e.g., EVs).
The second class of bidirectional charging systems not contemplated in the Decision Tree is
bidirectional charging systems that operate in unidirectional charging modes at all times,
unless and until the manufacturer enables them for bidirectional charging. Crucially, this
enablement is a strict software-locked gate configured at the time of system commissioning. The
capability to enable bidirectional functionality is accessible only via a proprietary
commissioning application utilized exclusively by the manufacturer or certified channel
partners; it is not a setting that the customer can access or toggle on themselves. This
manufacturer enablement step would either occur to become (a) the above-referenced type of
“island-only” system or (b) a grid-parallel bidirectional charging system following an approved
SIR request.
For example, new electric school bus depots should be permitted to operate bidirectional
charging systems in load-only mode before receiving SIR approval. Ordering and installing
vehicles and chargers, only for them to sit idle, unable to charge to get children to school while
awaiting SIR approval, is a negative customer experience that will undercut New York’s goals
for electric school bus deployment. Notably, this treatment (connecting in load-only mode prior
to receiving DER interconnection approval) has already been explicitly codified in the
interconnection rules of California2 and Maryland3, has been proposed in Nevada and
Massachusetts, and has been reported to occur in other jurisdictions.
1 New York Public Service Commission, August 1, 2025, New York State Standardized Interconnection
Requirements and Application Process For New Distributed Generators and/or Energy Storage Systems 5 MW or
Less Connected in Parallel with Utility Distribution Systems.
2 See California Public Utilities Commission’s Electric Rule 21: Generating Facility Interconnections available
at https://www.cpuc.ca.gov/Rule21/.
3 See The Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR) 20.50 available at
https://regs.maryland.gov/us/md/exec/comar/20.50.
2

Another example where load-only deployment of bidirectional charging systems will soon
become increasingly common is in the anticipated prevalence of AC bidirectional charging
solutions. At least one such system is already on New York roads and in garages and homes
across the state. These systems are lower-cost and simpler than DC bidirectional charging
systems because they do not require a separate inverter, a dark-start battery, or, in some cases, a
gateway. As a result, it is likely New York utilities will see widespread adoption of a given
vehicle and charger model marketed for both unidirectional and, if and only if enabled by the
manufacturer, bidirectional charging. If there is no option to connect these systems in load-only
mode without going through the SIR process, these customers, which may quickly number in the
tens of thousands, will be faced with the added costs and delay associated with SIR study, even if
they do not request that the manufacturer enable bidirectional charging. This, too, directly
undercuts New York’s goals for EV charger deployment and the swift EVSE connection process
envisioned by the NY PSC (i.e., via the Electric Vehicle Infrastructure and Interconnection
Working Group).
Because both types of bidirectional charging systems (backup-only and load-only) are not
designed to nor would be deployed to discharge energy to the grid while grid-connected, they
should not be subject to New York’s SIR review process per the New York State Standardized
Interconnection Requirements and Application Process For New Distributed Generators and
Energy Storage Systems 5 MW or Less Connected in Parallel with Utility Distribution Systems,
Appendix A, unless and until they request such treatment (i.e., to subsequently enable grid-
parallel bidirectional charging mode). Instead, they are more appropriately treated as (a)
residential standby generators (for island-only systems) and (b) unidirectional EVSE (for
bidirectional-“capable” systems not yet enabled by the manufacturer nor accessible by the
customer for any bidirectional operations).
VGIC respectfully requests that the ITWG revisit the Decision Tree, considering the below flow
chart and, this time, seek feedback from relevant stakeholders in the EV and EVSE industry:
3

VGIC and its members are committed to bringing innovative technologies to market that meet
the highest standards of safety and protection while delivering meaningful value to consumers.
VGIC welcomes the opportunity to discuss these comments with the ITWG.
4

Sincerely,
Steve Letendre, PhD
Senior Advisor
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
sletendre@vgicouncil.org
(802) 779-3580
5