Bidirectional EV Interconnection Process (VGIC suggested edits, May 2026) Commented [ZW1]: VGIC recommends this language
instead of "V2X, V2G, V2H," which do not have standard
definitions.
Commented [ZW2]: VGIC recommends drawing a
It is the position of the EDCs that electric vehicle charging systems operating in with distinction here between DC and AC bidirectional
bidirectional capabilitiesmode, commonly referred to as V2X, V2G, V2H, and any other charging systems.
terminology referring to export of power from a vehicle to a while grid- connected load and DC bidirectional charging systems adhere to IEEE 1547-
operated in parallel with a power source provided by the utility, will be treated as any other 2018 via UL 1741 SB certification.
inverter-based battery interconnections as defined in those guidelines within this AC bidirectional charging systems meet IEEE 1547-2018
through one of two pathways:
document, except for the following provisions.:
1. UL 1741 SB CRD for DER Systems. The vehicle and
- Bidirectional charging systems with an inverter external to the vehicle, referred charger are certified as a single system.
to as DC Bidirectional Charging Systems, and subject to the guidelines for
2. UL 1741 SC. The vehicle is designed to SAE J3072, and
inverter-based battery interconnection within this document with the exception the UL 1741 SC-certified charger acts as a gatekeeper
that the equipment shall be certified to UL1741 Supplement SBC at such time executing all relevant oversight functions to ensure IEEE
1547-2018 is met.
this standard in released, and UL9741 Standard for Safety of Electric Vehicle
Commented [ZW3]: i.e., "electric vehicle charging
Power Export Equipment (EVPE) . systems operating in bidirectional mode while grid-
connected and operated in parallel with a power source
- Bidirectional charging systems with on-board inverter functions in the electric
provided by the utility"
vehicle, referred to as AC Bidirectional Charging Systems, and subject to the
Commented [ZW4]: UL 1741 SB is applicable to DC
guidelines for inverter-based battery interconnection within this document, Bidirectional Charging Systems.
must either: Commented [ZW5]: Other jurisdictions that have
clarified or modified interconnection rules to consider
o (a) bBe certified as a DER System through the relevant UL 1741 SB bidirectional charging systems have required UL 1741,
Certification Requirement Decision (CRD), or; but not UL 9741. See, for example, California's Rule 21.
Maryland's COMAR 20.50.02. NV Energy's proposed
o (b) Use an EV charging station throughcertified to UL 1741 SC. Theseis interconnection rules update. NY SIR.
requirements isare in addition to compliance with Supplements SA and
This is because UL 9741 is for one piece of equipment
SB otherwise required in these Guidelines for ESS. that performs both functions of a UL 1741 Grid Support
Inverter and an EV charger. However, some systems may
have separate pieces of equipment. E.g., an EVSE
wallbox that is a separate piece of equipment from an
inverter wallbox.
Commented [ZW6]: i.e., "electric vehicle charging
Special Note: systems operating in bidirectional mode while grid-
connected and operated in parallel with a power source
provided by the utility"
If the bidirectional charger is integral to the vehicle itself, the vehicle will not be permitted
Commented [ZW7]: Using the UL 1741 SB CRD for DER
to export to the grid, or offset a load connected in parallel with a grid source of power at
Systems, UL addresses and certifies the grid
any location other than the point of interconnection with Municipal approval, a meter interconnection and support functionality directly at the
EV. This pathway is best suited for specific installation
change when required, and the Permission to Operate documentation. Any material sites with specific EV and EVSE combinations.
modifications to, or replacement of, bi-directional charging equipment will be subject to Commented [ZW8]: VGIC recommends removing this,
the requirements as otherwise referenced within these Guidelines. as it is already covered in the above. i.e., DC systems
meet UL 1741 SB. AC systems either meet UL 1741 SB via
CRD or meet UL 1741 SC, which builds on UL 1741 SB by
situating the EVSE as a gatekeeper which only authorizes
bidirectional charging from SAE J3072 compatible
vehicles.