March 2, 2026
Joint Letter on Managed Charging in Formal Case No. 1167
The undersigned parties appreciate the opportunity to submit these comments
regarding managed charging in DC. We collectively support the introduction of
advanced load management programs in the District, specifically Electric Vehicle (EV)
managed charging, as a practical near-term tool to advance the District’s climate goals
while maintaining reliability and affordability.
To ensure the District meets its climate goals while maintaining a reliable and
affordable grid, we urge the Commission to approve Pepco’s proposed Schedule
R-EV-TOU and encourage the rapid development of a Smart Charge Management
(SCM) program.
Support for Schedule R-EV-TOU: A Critical First Step
On January 30, 2026, Pepco filed a proposal for an EV-only Time-of-Use (TOU) rate.
We believe this proposal is an essential "Phase 1" for managed charging in DC for
several reasons.
● Customer Savings: The proposal offers a 3-cent-per-kWh credit, saving a
typical EV driver who uses approximately 250 kWh per month about $90
annually.
● System Benefits: This rate design provides price signals to encourage off-peak
charging, creating a more efficient electric system.
● Proven Success: Similar rates in Maryland have resulted in 97% of charging
occurring during off-peak periods.1
● Low Cost of Adoption: By utilizing vehicle telematics and networked
chargers, this program avoids the need for customers to install expensive
second meters.
The Case for Smart Charge Management
While TOU rates help shift load from peak periods, they do not protect the local
distribution system. We encourage Pepco to follow this filing with a Smart Charge
Management (SCM) program, a model already successfully being operated by Pepco,
Baltimore Gas and Electric, and Delmarva Power in Maryland.
Residential EV charging can significantly strain local infrastructure, particularly
secondary transformers. Transformers rated at or below 50 kVA can be overloaded by
1 BGE Semi-Annual Progress Report for the period of July 1, 2025 through December 31, 2025 filed in Case No.
9478 on February 2, 2026
1

only a few EVs charging simultaneously. SCM actively manages charging at the
secondary transformer and feeder level to prevent these overloads and extend the life
of distribution assets.
The economic value of optimizing charging for the distribution grid is
well-documented. We draw the Commission’s attention to two key studies:
Argonne National Lab (ANL): In an analysis of managed charging in Maryland,
ANL and the Smart Energy Power Alliance (SEPA) estimated roughly $300 per
EV-year in downstream distribution benefits alone by deferring necessary transformer
and feeder upgrades.2
The Brattle Group: A recent report found that annual utility system benefits from
distribution-optimized managed charging could reach $400 per EV compared to
unmanaged charging. Brattle also estimated $200 in annual distribution savings,
specifically when comparing distribution-optimized active managed charging to
TOU-based charging alone (such as R-EV-TOU).3
Conclusion
The economic and environmental benefits of these programs for DC households are
clear. We respectfully request that the Commission approve Schedule R-EV-TOU and
encourage Pepco to file for an SCM program in DC. We look forward to continued
engagement and thank the Commission for consideration of these comments.
Thank you,
Cory Bullis
/s/_Cory_Bullis
Director, Energy & Environment Policy
Alliance for Automotive Innovation
cbullis@autosinnovate.org
Amber Dorner
/s/_Amber_Dorner
Energy Policy Lead
General Motors
amber.dorner@gm.com
2 Smart Energy Power Alliance, Exelon’s Managed Charging Program,
https://sepapower.org/resource/exelons-managed-charging-program/
3 Brattle Group, Demonstrating the Full Value of Managed Electric Vehicle Charging,
https://www.brattle.com/wp-content/uploads/2026/01/Demonstrating-the-Full-Value-of-Managed-Elec
tric-Vehicle-Charging.pdf
2

Zach Woogan
/s/_Zach_Woogan
Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
zwoogen@vgicouncil.org
Bradley Harris
/s/_Bradley_Harris
Director, Policy and Regulatory Affairs
WeaveGrid
brad.harris@weavegrid.com
The Alliance for Automotive Innovation represents the full auto industry value chain,
including the manufacturers producing most vehicles sold in the U.S., equipment suppliers,
battery producers, semiconductor makers, technology companies, and autonomous vehicle
developers. Our mission is to work with policymakers to realize a cleaner, safer, and
smarter transportation future and to ensure a healthy and competitive auto industry that
supports U.S. economic and national security.
General Motors LLC, headquartered in Detroit, MI, is a global automotive manufacturer
leading the development of groundbreaking technologies that further its vision of zero
crashes, zero emissions, and zero congestion. Our automotive operations meet the demands
of our customers with vehicles developed, manufactured, and/or marketed under the Buick,
Cadillac, Chevrolet, and GMC brands.
VGIC is a 501(c)6 membership-based advocacy group committed to advancing the role of
vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”) through policy development, education, outreach, and
research. VGIC supports the transition to a decarbonized transportation and electric sector
by ensuring that the value of flexible EV charging and discharging is recognized and
compensated, thereby achieving a more reliable, affordable, and efficient electric grid.
WeaveGrid is a software company that helps utilities increase the adoption of electric
vehicles and other distributed resources (e.g., residential batteries) through greater
understanding of customer charging behaviors, managed charging programs, and
distribution-level optimization.
3