June 26, 2026
California Energy Commission
1516 Ninth Street
Sacramento, CA 95814
Docket Number: 22-EVI-06
RE: Comments of the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council and Alliance for Automotive
Innovation on “A roadmap to unlocking the benefits of bidirectional charging”
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC) and Alliance for Automotive Innovation (Auto
Innovators) appreciate the California Energy Commission’s (CEC) whitepaper ‘A roadmap to
unlocking the benefits of bidirectional charging’ (Roadmap). The CEC has deep expertise in
advancing bidirectional charging through efforts such as the Vehicle Grid Integration Lab, the
Responsive, Easy Charging Products with Dynamic Signals (REDWDS) grant solicitation, and,
most recently, the Charging Interoperability and Collaboration Yard. These projects expand the
CEC’s technical expertise to inform bidirectional charging policy development, and VGIC and
Auto Innovators support the CEC’s continued project work, research, and analysis to mature and
scale this technology.
VGIC is a national 501(c)6 member-based association focused on unlocking flexible electric
vehicle (EV) charging and discharging to support a more reliable, affordable, and efficient
energy future. VGIC accelerates the market for vehicle-grid integration (VGI) solutions through
research, education, and policy engagement. Established in 2020, VGIC represents
40 members, including automotive original equipment manufacturers (OEMs), leading electric
vehicle service providers (EVSPs) and aggregators, electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE)
manufacturers and site developers, and non-investor-owned utilities. VGIC prioritizes
collaborative engagement with all VGI champions and remains business model- and technology-
agnostic.
Auto Innovators represents the full auto industry value chain, including the manufacturers
producing most vehicles sold in the U.S., equipment suppliers, battery producers, semiconductor
makers, technology companies, and autonomous vehicle developers. Our mission is to work with
policymakers to realize a cleaner, safer, and smarter transportation future and to ensure a healthy
and competitive auto industry that supports U.S. economic and national security. Representing
over 5 percent of the country’s GDP, responsible for supporting nearly 11 million jobs, and
driving $1.5 trillion in annual economic activity, the automotive industry is the nation’s largest
manufacturing sector.1
1 Alliance for Automotive Innovation. (n.d.). Resources and insights. https://www.autosinnovate.org/resources/insights
1

We share the CEC’s goal to use bidirectional charging to improve grid reliability, reduce peak
demand, and provide additional value to EV customers. We offer the following comments to
help realize the Roadmap’s identified benefits.
I. Offer rebates for bidirectional charging equipment.
We support the Roadmap’s conclusion that EVs can provide, “by a wide margin,” the largest
contribution to demand flexibility among distributed resources, and that bidirectional charging
could provide approximately three times the value of unidirectional managed charging alone.2
These conclusions are consistent with other analyses: Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E) found that
bidirectional charging systems could create 859 MW of demand flexibility through 2040 beyond
managed charging alone.3 Similarly, the California Public Utilities Commission’s (CPUC) latest
Integrated Resource Planning assumptions estimate bidirectional charging can provide more than
13,500 MW of capacity by 2045.4
Grant solicitations, such as REDWDS, have been valuable in enabling bidirectional charging
projects. However, applying for and managing grants can be costly, complicated, and time-
consuming. Successful grant administration typically requires dedicated teams and resources.
Alternatively, rebate programs, such as CALeVIP and EnergIIZE, are simpler and easier to
access. A dedicated rebate program, or a carve-out within an existing program to provide higher
incentives for bidirectional charging systems, could help deploy bidirectional charging systems
faster, accelerating implementation of pilot projects that ultimately mature the technology’s
development.
II. Work with the California Public Utilities Commission to reduce Rule 21
interconnection application fees.
The three large investor-owned utilities in the state impose an $800 fee to apply to interconnect
bidirectional EV charging systems, which is significantly higher than interconnection fees for
solar net energy metering (NEM) systems,5 and is the highest interconnection application fee we
have observed for such sites across the entire U.S. This fee creates an unnecessary, outsized
barrier to bidirectional charging adoption. Revisions to the $800 fee for non-NEM/non-NBT
2 Roadmap at 3.
3 PG&E, Electrification Impacts Study Part 2 Report, January 28, 2026, filed in Rulemaking (“R.”) 21-06-017,
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M596/K907/596907812.PDF
4 CPUC, Draft Inputs & Assumptions, 2024 – 2026 Integrated Resource Planning (IRP) at p.111.
https://www.cpuc.ca.gov/-/media/cpuc-website/divisions/energydivision/documents/integrated-resource-plan-and-
long-term-procurement-plan-irp-ltpp/2024-2026-irp-cycle-eventsand-
materials/2025_draft_inputs_and_assumptions_doc_20250220.pdf
5 The current NEM interconnection fees are $145 (PG&E), $132 (SDG&E), $94 (SCE).
2

systems (such as bidirectional charging systems) are currently being discussed in the CPUC’s
latest Rule 21 interconnection proceeding.6 This is a prime opportunity to address this cost
barrier to bidirectional charging. From VGIC’s and Auto Innovator’s understanding, this $800
application fee was adopted in 20007 with the assumption that mostly large stand-alone battery
storage systems would apply under the non-NEM/non-NBT pathway. The fee was set at this high
amount arbitrarily. Given the industry has evolved, and small-scale bidirectional charging
systems are put into this category and require an $800 fee to apply for interconnection, we
encourage the CEC to work with the CPUC to right-size this cost in the Rule 21 update so that it
does not create an unnecessary financial barrier to deploy bidirectional charging systems.
III. Work with the California Public Utilities Commission to develop rates and/or
programs that compensate bidirectional charging customers for exports.
We agree with the Roadmap that drivers are not well compensated for exporting power to the
grid from bidirectional charging systems. Without export compensation or participation
pathways for grid services, customers may increasingly use these systems for onsite consumption
and backup power. While these use cases are still valuable, they are less likely to support the grid
during peak periods, exacerbating electricity affordability concerns.
We encourage the CEC to work with the CPUC to expand export rates, programs, and/or market
integration opportunities for bidirectional charging systems, which will encourage technology
providers to continue developing grid-supportive products, and ensure that California captures
substantial reliability and ratepayer benefits identified throughout the Roadmap.
We also encourage the CEC to advance export credit opportunities beyond those considered by
the CPUC. For example, the CEC’s Demand Side Grid Support program is an important
opportunity to create export credits for these systems; it’s Load Management Standard also
drives modernized utility rate design across the state, and updating the standard may be an
appropriate place to discuss export credit opportunities.
IV. Adopt low-cost alternatives to deploy solar-paired bidirectional charging
systems.
Based on input from our members, we estimate that 50 to 70 percent of California’s early
adopters of residential bidirectional charging systems also have rooftop solar. Currently,
6 Alice Reynolds. California Public Utilities Commission. Assigned Commissioner’s Scoping Memo and Ruling.
Rulemaking 25-08-002. Issued March 3, 2026.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M601/K158/601158095.PDF
7 Loretta M. Lynch et al. California Public Utilities Commission. Decision Adopting Interconnection Standards.
Rulemaking 99-10-025. Issued December 21, 2000.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/WORD_PDF/FINAL_DECISION/4117.PDF
3

investor-owned utility customers using both legacy NEM tariffs and the latest net billing tariff
(NBT) who install bidirectional charging systems, including non-export, grid-parallel systems,
must install a net generation output meter (NGOM) on the NEM/NBT-eligible system.8 The
NGOM data measures the customer’s NEM/NBT credits, ensuring “NEM integrity.”
Installing residential NGOMs increases costs (by hundreds to, in some cases, thousands of
dollars) and delays for customers, which erases the value of residential bidirectional charging
systems.
The CPUC has adopted policies to allow other technologies to use low-cost alternatives to
NGOMs, but currently excludes bidirectional charging systems, creating an artificial cost
barrier that picks technology winners and losers. We encourage the CEC to work with the
CPUC to create parity between technologies; we offer some options below for
consideration.
Option 1: Today, small NEM or NBT residential solar customers who add stationary energy
storage can maintain NEM integrity using a zero-cost estimation methodology, which credits the
NEM/NBT system based on estimated production. A customer’s measured exports could exceed
solar production, but their NEM/NBT credit would never exceed the estimated NEM/NBT
production. However, because California’s large investor-owned utilities do not, based on our
understanding, consider bidirectional charging systems as NEM/NBT-eligible energy storage
systems, they cannot use the estimation methodology, trapping them into using NGOMs via
NEM/NBT-Multiple Tariff. The CEC should work with the CPUC to explore the necessary
policy changes to expand the use of the zero-cost estimation methodology for NEM/NBT-paired
bidirectional charging systems. One change could be to revise the language of NEM/NBT-
Multiple Tariff so that NEM/NBT-paired bidirectional charging customers could use the
estimation methodology. Another change could be to deem bidirectional charging systems as
NEM/NBT-eligible energy storage systems, thereby allowing NEM/NBT-paired bidirectional
charging systems to use the estimation methodology as existing small NEM/NBT-paired
stationary storage systems do today. There may be other policy solutions to unlock the
estimation methodology treatment for NEM/NBT-paired bidirectional charging systems, and
Auto Innovators and VGIC are available to work with CEC, CPUC, and other stakeholders to
consider them.
Option 2: Another alternative is to use embedded submetering in the customer’s equipment.
Under subtractive billing, which the large investor-owned utilities have been directed to establish
under an August 2022 CPUC Decision, NEM/NBT-eligible energy (kWh) could be separated
8 The NGOM is required under NEM-Multiple Tariff (NEM-MT) and NBT-Multiple Tariff (NBT-MT), which was
created in anticipation that customers may install exporting non-NEM/NBT systems beside NEM/NBT-eligible
systems.
4

from bidirectional charging system energy (kWh) to determine appropriate compensation for
each system.9 However, the August 2022 CPUC Decision denied an extension of eligibility for
Plug-In Electric Vehicle Submetering to customers with NEM systems, noting that it “presents a
complex situation.”
Lastly, California’s transition from legacy NEM to newer marginal-cost-based export credits,
such as NBT (based on the CPUC’s Avoided Cost Calculator) and, eventually, dynamic export
rates, fundamentally eliminates the need to ensure NEM integrity. NEM integrity is important
when customers receive export credits that exceed the marginal benefits they provide to the grid.
Measures to ensure NEM integrity, such as the estimation methodology or the installation of a
costly NGOM, ensure that only energy from the NEM-eligible system (i.e., renewable
generation) receives NEM credit. However, when customers receive export credits equal to the
marginal benefit to the grid, for example, NBT credits based on the CPUC’s adopted Avoided
Cost Calculator (ACC), the source of energy is no longer relevant. An April 2026 CPUC
Decision rejects one such proposal, which would have applied CPUC ACC -based values, using
the same averaging methodology for NBT customers, to bidirectional charging customers.10 We
recommend that the CEC work with the CPUC to consider expanding technology-specific
marginal cost-based export compensation to a technology-agnostic model.
V. Work with the California Air Resources Board (CARB) to ensure its impending
EV battery durability and warranty requirements properly account for
bidirectional charging use.
When CARB first adopted Advanced Clean Cars II, it required automotive manufacturers to:
• Warrant that EV battery state of health would not deteriorate to less than 70 percent
(which increased to 75 percent over time) for eight years or 100,000 miles, whichever
occurred first.11
• Design EV batteries so that they retain at least 70 percent of the certification range value
(which increased to 80 percent over time) for a useful life of 10 years or 150,000 miles,
whichever occurred first.12
As CARB begins its new Drive Forward rulemaking, it may again consider EV battery durability
and warranty requirements. However, the original requirements did not fully account for
bidirectional charging’s effect on battery state of health. If future requirements similarly do not
9 See CPUC Decision 20-08-024. Decision Adopting Plug-In Electric Vehicle Submetering Protocol and Electric
Vehicle Supply Equipment Communication Protocols.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Published/G000/M496/K419/496419890.PDF
10 See CPUC Decision 26-04-033. Decision Regarding Southern California Edison Company’s Application to
Establish Marginal Costs, Allocate Revenues and Design Rates.
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Published/G000/M606/K032/606032513.PDF
11 California Air Resources Board. Section 1962.8, Title 13, California Code of Regulations.
12 California Air Resources Board. Section 1962.4, Title 13, California Code of Regulations.
5

account for bidirectional charging, they could create significant financial risk for automotive
manufacturers. Replacing an EV battery can cost $5,000 to $25,00013,14, so replacing even a
small number of battery electric vehicles through recalls or warranty claims could, in a worst-
case scenario, total hundreds of millions of dollars. This uncertainty may discourage
manufacturers from broadly offering bidirectional charging features across EV models or
significantly increase EV prices to account for these risks, which could inhibit EV adoption and
undermine the state’s broader clean energy, grid reliability, and resiliency goals.
We believe including virtual miles in any durability and warranty mileage requirements best
accounts for bidirectional charging impacts. When discharging energy from a battery for
bidirectional charging purposes, the energy (kWh) can be accurately converted into an equivalent
mile traveled. Including this calculation more accurately reflects a battery’s state of health and
could be easily accessible to the driver through the vehicle display. We look forward to
discussing this methodology further and encourage the CEC to work with CARB to ensure their
requirements do not unintentionally inhibit the development of bidirectional charging features.
Conclusion
VGIC and Auto Innovators appreciate the opportunity to provide these comments and commend
the CEC for continuing to advance bidirectional charging in California. The Roadmap
appropriately recognizes the substantial reliability, affordability, and resilience benefits that
bidirectional charging systems can provide. Continued coordination across state agencies to
reduce interconnection barriers, expand compensation opportunities, and support scalable
deployment will be critical to ensuring California captures the full value of this growing flexible
energy resource.
Respectfully submitted,
Zach Woogen Cory Bullis
Executive Director Director, Energy & Environment Policy
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council Alliance for Automotive Innovation
vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org cbullis@autosinnovate.org
13 Recharged. How Much Does It Cost to Replace an Electric Car Battery in 2025?
https://recharged.com/articles/how-much-to-replace-electric-car-battery.
14 Witt, J & Najman, L. Electric Car Battery Replacement Costs. Recurrent. December 3, 2024.
https://www.recurrentauto.com/research/costs-ev-battery-replacement.
6