BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION OF THE STATE OF COLORADO
PROCEEDING NO. 25D-0536E
IN THE MATTER OF PETITION OF FORD MOTOR COMPANY FOR A
DECLARATORY ORDER DETERMINING THAT FORD'S ELECTRIC VEHICLE
CHARGING SYSTEMS WITH HOME BACKUP POWER FEATURES AND DISABLED
HOME POWER MANAGEMENT FEATURES ARE NOT SUBJECT TO
INTERCONNECTION RULES
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL’S COMMENTS IN SUPPORT OF FORD
MOTOR COMPANY’S PETITION FOR DECLARATORY ORDER
The Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) respectfully submits these Comments in support
of the Petition for Declaratory Order (“Petition”) filed by Ford Motor Company (“Ford”) on
December 23, 2025.
I. INTRODUCTION
VGIC is a national 501(c)(6) non-profit trade association focused on accelerating the role of
flexible electric vehicle (“EV”) charging and discharging to support a more reliable, efficient,
and affordable electric grid. VGIC supports Ford’s request for a Declaratory Order clarifying the
applicability of the Commission's Interconnection Rules to systems using Home Backup Power
(“HBP”) or disabled Home Power Management (“HPM”) features.
II. COMMENTS
VGIC has engaged closely with automakers, utilities, third-party testing laboratories, EV
charging equipment manufacturers, vehicle-grid integration (“VGI”) aggregators and service
providers, policy-makers, non-profit organizations, and academics since 2020 on the topic of
bidirectional charging systems, including through the development of its V2X Bidirectional
Charging Systems: Best Practices for Service Connection or Interconnection.1 Based on this
experience, the Commission granting Ford’s request through a Declaratory Order would
constitute a reasonable formalization and confirmation of an existing best practice already
implemented and, in some cases, clarified, in other markets. VGIC agrees with the Petition’s
assertion that HBP feature is not an “interconnection resource” because it operates in a “break-
before-make” fashion, physically isolating the home from the grid before discharging power. As
noted in the Petition, the Electric Power Research Institute (“EPRI”) conducted laboratory
assessments confirming that the system provides backup power only after the system is properly
disconnected from the grid. Moreover, this treatment is widely applied to existing home backup
1 V2X Bidirectional Charging Systems: Best Practices for Service Connection or Interconnection. August 2022.
https://www.vgicouncil.org/s/VGIC-Special-Initiative-2022.pdf
1

systems operating in a break-before-make configuration. Because these systems are physically
incapable of backfeeding the grid during operation, they cannot impact power quality or safety.
Classifying such verified, isolated systems as “interconnection resources” would impose
administrative burdens without providing any grid safety benefit. As transportation
electrification is expected to continue growing in Colorado, the unnecessary paperwork and
administrative burden of completing and processing interconnection applications, along with the
associated costs, including any application fees, for both the utility and the customer, must be
considered. Without technical merit to justify these soft costs and/or application fees, they would
serve only to create barriers to customer adoption with no incremental grid safety benefit.
Additionally, regarding Ford’s HPM feature (which supports grid-parallel bidirectional
charging), Ford clarifies that the hardware is sold with this feature disabled. Activation requires a
strict three-phase process: (1) Eligibility, (2) Interconnection & Onboarding, and (3) Final
Activation.
VGIC supports the position that latent hardware capabilities should not trigger interconnection
rules. Regulation should focus on active capabilities. Ford’s process ensures that the utility is
notified and an interconnection agreement is signed before the device is enabled for parallel
operation. This, too, echoes the existing paradigm for other customer-sited distributed energy
resources, such as rooftop solar or stationary energy storage, which do not enter grid-parallel
operation until the utility grants an interconnection agreement. Requiring interconnection filings
for disabled hardware would unnecessarily and significantly bottleneck EV deployment in
Colorado.
Lastly, VGIC notes that granting this Petition would align Colorado with other leading
regulatory jurisdictions. For example, the Michigan Public Service Commission recently issued a
declaratory ruling finding that Ford’s HBP feature does not require interconnection authorization
because it prevents parallel operation. Building this type of consistency across jurisdictions is
critical to reducing friction in the relatively nascent VGI solutions market, ensuring EVs remain
a valuable, safe, environmentally friendly, and relatively inexpensive backup power option for
Coloradoans.
III. CONCLUSION
VGIC respectfully requests that the Commission grant the Petition and issue the four
determinations requested by Ford, affirming that its isolated backup systems and disabled grid-
parallel features do not trigger interconnection requirements.
Respectfully submitted,
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (VGIC)
2

vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
(279) 895-7855
www.vgicouncil.org
3