BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Application of Southern California Edison Application 24-06-014
Company (U-338E) for Approval of Large (Filed September 30, 2024)
Power Dynamic Pricing Rate.
Application 24-12-008
And Related Matter.
OPENING BRIEF OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
Vehicle-Grid Integration Council
1401 21st St., Suite 5409
Sacramento, California 95811
Telephone: (510) 665-7811
Email: vgicregulatory@vgicouncil.org
Grace Pratt
Caliber Strategies
801 K Street, Suite 2800
Sacramento, CA 95814
Telephone: (818) 264-6437
Email: grace@caliberstrat.com
Date: July 1, 2026

BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Application of Southern California Edison Application 24-06-014
Company (U-338E) for Approval of Large (Filed September 30, 2024)
Power Dynamic Pricing Rate.
Application 24-12-008
And Related Matter.
OPENING BRIEF OF THE VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Pursuant to Rule 13.1 of the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the California Putlic
Utilities Commission (“Commission”) and the Administrative Law Judge’s Ruling Modifying The
Proceeding Schedule Including the Addition of Supplemental Testimony issued on March 25, 2026,
the Vehicle-Grid Integration Council (“VGIC”) hereby submits this Brief on the consolidated
Application of Southern California Edison Company (U 338-E) for Approval of Large Power
Dynamic Pricing Rate.
I. INTRODUCTION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to comment on Southern California Edison Company's
("SCE") dynamic rate design. The record in this proceeding demonstrates that SCE’s dynamic rate
developed for Load Management Standard compliance should include dynamic export credits,
especially for bidirectional electric vehicle charging systems (i.e., non-NEM and non-NBT
exporting systems). Dynamic export credits are consistent with the Commission's clear, repeated
direction that distributed energy resource (“DER”) exports: (a) be compensated based on unscaled
marginal costs; (b) can be implemented using SCE's proposed dynamic rate framework; and (c)
will enable customers to provide valuable grid services when those services are most needed. In
an era of outright ratepayer rage over electricity affordability, the Commission must not
1

fumble an immediate opportunity to unlock grid-edge energy exports that, by definition, are
provided during the most valuable hours.
When SCE developed its proposal, it anticipated that customers with bidirectional EV
charging systems, which are non-NEM and non-NBT systems, would have access to export credits
through the Vehicle-Grid Resource Proposal ("VGRP") in Application (“A.”) 24-03-019.
Following the Commission's decision not to adopt VGRP, that assumption no longer holds. As a
result, customers with bidirectional EV charging systems now lack a durable pathway to provide
compensated exports to the grid, despite broad agreement in this proceeding that dynamic export
compensation should be based on unscaled marginal costs.
Providing a dynamic export rate would align SCE's proposal with the Commission's
marginal-cost pricing principles while unlocking substantial reliability and affordability benefits
from California's rapidly growing fleet of EVs, a growing share of which offer bidirectional
charging features. Conversely, failing to provide a pathway for exports will encourage customers
and technology providers to optimize these systems primarily for behind-the-meter applications,
limiting their ability to support the electric grid and significantly reducing the broader benefits
these resources can provide. For these reasons, the Commission should require SCE to include
dynamic export credits for bidirectional EV charging systems (as non-NEM, non-NBT systems)
in the implementation of its dynamic rate.
II. THE COMMISSION SHOULD REQUIRE DYNAMIC EXPORT CREDITS BASED
ON UNSCALED MARGINAL COSTS.
A. The record demonstrates broad agreement that dynamic export credits should be based
on unscaled marginal costs.
The record reflects broad agreement that export credits be included in a dynamic rate based
on unscaled marginal costs consistent with D.25-08-049. The parties addressing export credits,
2

including Cal Advocates, SEIA, and VGIC, all share support for a dynamic export rate based on
unscaled marginal costs.1 This is in line with the Commission’s underlying Demand Flexibility
Design Principles, which state that demand flexibility tariffs should provide marginal cost-
based compensation for exports.2 As discussed by SEIA, a dynamic export rate should be
adopted because “Export rates that are closely linked to actual market prices and loads will provide
the most economically efficient price signals.”3 In other proceedings, Cal Advocates has proposed
that the Commission should “expand existing dynamic rate pilots [to include exports] and continue
to test export credits based on a dynamic price signal,” since these dynamic rate frameworks can
most accurately compensate for the value of exports. 4
Additionally, Cal Advocates has highlighted a concern that a dynamic transmission rate
may include recovery of non-marginal costs.5 However, VGIC believes that if SCE’s dynamic
transmission rate includes non-marginal cost components, those components should be removed
from the export rate, such that all export components are based solely on unscaled marginal costs,
constituting a defensible, durable approach. VGIC believes that this is technically feasible, since
SCE has shared the ability to separate scaled from unscaled factors and separate out marginal from
non-marginal cost components.
B. SCE has confirmed that dynamic export credits can be implemented.
1 CA-04 at p.21, lines 8-9; SEIA-01 at p.14, lines 23-27 – p.15, lines 1-6; VGIC-01 at p.15, lines 16-22 –
p.16, lines 1-3.
2 SEIA-01 at p.14, lines 12-15.
3 SEIA-01 at p.14, lines 15-16.
4 Cal Advocates comments at 4
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M582/K489/582489355.PDF
5 CA-04 at p.22, lines 3-20.
3

The record contains no evidence that technical barriers prevent the implementation of
dynamic export credits. In fact, SCE itself has, in no uncertain terms, confirmed that “SCE
can offer dynamic hourly export rates following the dynamic rates design methods as
detailed in A.24-12-008,”6 and has outlined that SCE would be able to develop a rate,
“consist[ing] of non-EPMC-scaled SCE distribution and generation capacity marginal cost
rates, CAISO day-ahead market prices, and hourly transmission prices, as ordered in
Decision 25-08-049.”7
Notably, Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E) has also shown that dynamic export
compensation rates can be developed and implemented. PG&E currently offers export
compensation in its dynamic rate pilot and proposes to extend dynamic rate export compensation
in its long-term dynamic rate (with the subscription component becoming optional in the long-
term proposal).8 Given the already proven ability of utilities to implement dynamic export rates,
and SCE’s explicit confirmation that a dynamic export compensation rate compliant with D.25-
08-049 can be feasibly implemented in its service territory, the Commission should require SCE
to adopt dynamic export compensation based on unscaled marginal costs for which bidirectional
EV charging systems (and likely other DERs) are eligible for credits.
III. THE FACTUAL CIRCUMSTANCES UNDERLYING SCE'S PROPOSAL HAVE
MATERIALLY CHANGED.
SCE's original proposal did not include dynamic export compensation because it
anticipated that customers with bidirectional EV charging systems would instead receive export
6 DATA REQUEST SET VGIC - SCE - 02
7 DATA REQUEST SET VGIC - SCE – 02 question 1.A
8 VGIC-01 at p.23, lines 14-20, citing PG&E, Pacific Gas and Electric Company 2023 General Rate Case
Phase II Supplemental Testimony Exhibit (PG&E-5) Real-Time Pricing Proposal, served to A.24-09-014
on October 29,2025, at p.2-41, lines 1-7.
4

compensation through the Vehicle-Grid Resource Proposal ("VGRP") in Application 24-03-019.
Under that framework, SCE was concerned that having both VGRP and a dynamic export rate
would “lead to customer confusion, settlement and billing complexities, and potentially promote
inequities among participating EV customers.”9
Since SCE filed this Application and submitted testimony outlining its proposed dynamic
rate, the Commission declined to adopt VGRP. As a result, the fundamental assumption underlying
SCE's export compensation proposal no longer exists. Unlike customers with solar, bidirectional
EV charging customers in SCE’s service territory now lack any export compensation pathway
beyond summer 2027. 10
In A.24-03-019, the Commission rejected VGRP because of concerns from Cal Advocates,
namely concerns around “the accuracy and cost-effectiveness of ACC-based, versus real-time
marginal-cost-based, credits in reflecting marginal costs.”11 Those concerns do not apply to the
proposal advanced here. Rather than relying on ACC values, VGIC and parties propose dynamic
export compensation based on unscaled marginal costs consistent with D.25-08-049. For this
reason, while Cal Advocates opposed VGRP, they can support dynamic export pricing, stating
“Cal Advocates supports the Commission adopting a dynamic export rate in this proceeding only
if the export rate is based only on unscaled marginal costs.”12
9 SCE-03 at p.41, lines 20-24.
10 See VGIC-01 at p.22, lines 19-21. Outside of rates, there are very limited opportunities for bidirectional
charging systems to provide value to the grid through exports in SCE’s service territory. The only currently
available programs are the Emergency Load Reduction Program (“ELRP”), which is scheduled to sunset
after 2027, and the Demand Side Grid Support Program (“DSGS”), which may not continue beyond this
year. As a result, absent further Commission action, bidirectional charging systems will effectively have no
pathway to provide grid services after 2027.
11 D.26-04-033 at 49.
12 CA-04 at p.21, lines 8-9.
5

IV. DYNAMIC EXPORT COMPENSATION WILL UNLOCK SUBSTANTIAL GRID
BENEFITS.
DERs can provide tremendous value to the grid through exports, especially from resources
that have not traditionally participated in Net Energy Metering (“NEM”) or Net Billing Tariff
(“NBT”) tariffs. EVs are the largest source of energy storage in California, with the California
Energy Commission (“CEC”) estimating that there are already 18.5 GW of aggregate vehicle
battery capacity statewide, surpassing California’s installed stationary storage capacity. 13 Every
day, additional vehicles are sold in California with grid-parallel bidirectional charging features,
including 24 models on the market today from 14 automotive brands, with four additional models
from four more automakers announced for upcoming release.14 For SCE specifically, as of the end
of 2025, VGIC estimated that there were already over 70,000 vehicles with bidirectional charging
features in its service territory.15
These resources can provide significant grid value. The Commission's own Integrated
Resource Planning assumptions indicate bidirectional EV charging could provide more than
13,500 MW of additional capacity by 2045 beyond the contributions from managed charging
alone.16 The CEC’s report on bidirectional charging estimates that bidirectional discharge will be
the largest source of customer load flexibility and grid value, providing 5 GW of residential peak
13 California Energy Commission. A Roadmap to Unlocking the Benefits of Bidirectional Charging. March
2026. Page 2. https://efiling.energy.ca.gov/GetDocument.aspx?tn=268952&DocumentContentId=106145
14 VGIC-01 at Table 1 (p.8-13) and p.14, lines 3-7.
15 VGIC-01 at p.13, lines 3-4.
16 VGIC-01 at p.5, lines 3-14, citing California Public Utilities Commission (“CPUC”), Draft Inputs &
Assumptions, 2024 – 2026 Integrated Resource Planning (IRP) at p.111. https://www.cpuc.ca.gov/-
/media/cpuc-website/divisions/energydivision/documents/integrated-resource-plan-and-long-term-
procurement-plan-irp-ltpp/2024-2026-irp-cycle-eventsand-
materials/2025_draft_inputs_and_assumptions_doc_20250220.pdf
6

load reduction and approximately three times the value of unidirectional managed charging.17
These projections demonstrate that establishing a pathway for bidirectional EV charging exports
is essential to realizing the reliability and affordability benefits anticipated in the Commission's
planning processes.
V. THE COMMISSION MUST ENABLE GRID-INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES THAT
ENCOURAGE CUSTOMERS TO CONTRIBUTE TO THE GRID, RATHER
THAN ENCOURAGE GRID DEFECTION.
Given the untapped potential of bidirectional EV charging, including the sheer energy
capacity available in each vehicle, customers will seek safe ways to use these assets to their benefit.
It is therefore critical to ratepayer interests that the Commission establish pathways that enable
and encourage these resources to contribute to grid needs. SCE has already demonstrated
significant customer interest in “V2G energy exports,” with 81% of SCE’s surveyed customers
expressing at least “a little interested” and 16% of customers stating they are “very interested.”18
Absent export opportunities or participation in grid service programs, customers are
likely to use these vehicles solely to meet onsite needs. The CEC’s Roadmap anticipates this
outcome, noting that customers can prioritize vehicle-to-home (“V2H”) applications to offset
consumption during peak time-of-use periods, potentially through systems voluntarily islanded
from the grid. 19 While such use cases can provide benefits, including an estimated 5 GW reduction
in residential peak load by 2030, these systems may operate disconnected from the grid and
therefore limit broader system value. Systems configured in this manner can mitigate a
customer’s impact on the grid but do nothing to mitigate their neighbor’s impact.
17 California Energy Commission. A Roadmap to Unlocking the Benefits of Bidirectional Charging. March
2026. Page 3.
18 SCE-04A at p. 125, lines 10-16.
19 The CEC roadmap refers to these systems as “grid disconnected.”
7

This trajectory risks pushing customers to maximize their private benefits rather than
aligning their behavior with the system's needs. While non-exporting applications of bidirectional
EV charging systems may occasionally coincide with grid benefits, they will not consistently
deliver optimized system outcomes. Customers acting independently will not necessarily
discharge at times of the highest grid value, nor will they support load shaping in ways that reduce
overall system costs, including the immense estimated costs of distribution system upgrade costs
identified by the Commission’s Electrification Impact Studies – Part 1, the utilities’ Electrification
Impact Studies – Part 2, and Cal Advocates’ Distribution Grid Electrification Model.
VGIC is particularly concerned that this dynamic could lead to unintended cost shifts. In
studies on the benefits of electrification, increased grid consumption during off-peak times reduces
rates for all Californians.20 Shaping increased load, therefore, becomes important to maximize
ratepayer savings, but simply removing significant overall load from the system does not
address California’s affordability crisis and could lead to cost shifts among customers.
In the absence of export compensation or clear grid-participation signals, technology
providers may increasingly design products for self-consumption or grid-disconnected use
cases. Early generations of bidirectional EV charging solutions are already marketed primarily for
grid-isolated backup power. Technology development cycles are occurring now for products that
will be deployed over the next three to five years. Without clear policy direction, these systems
are likely to be optimized for customer-only use, including daily cycling for time-of-use arbitrage
and elective islanding, even under “blue sky” or normal operating conditions.
20 The Public Advocates Office. Abishek, Benjamin Hoffman, Leo Steinmetz, and Richard Khoe.
Distribution Grid Electrification Model 2025. https://www.publicadvocates.cpuc.ca.gov/-/media/cal-
advocates-website/files/presentations/251030-public-advocates-office-dgem-2025-slides.pdf
8

To avoid this outcome, the Commission should establish a framework that encourages
bidirectional EV charging systems to remain connected to, and actively support, the grid.
Providing a pathway for export and grid services will help align customer incentives with system
needs, unlock the full value of these DERs, and ensure that benefits are shared across all ratepayers.
VGIC reiterates that, in the case of denying export compensation for bidirectional
EV charging customers, there is an immense ratepayer cost of inaction, as this misstep will
directly lead to greater development and deployment of very large home batteries (in the
form of 80kWh/11kW bidirectional EV charging systems) that support grid defection and
reduced utility revenue from these customers, directly undermining the Commission’s
affordability goals.
VI. CONCLUSION.
VGIC appreciates the opportunity to submit this Opening Brief. For the above reasons, the
Commission should require SCE to include dynamic export compensation based on unscaled
marginal costs as part of its dynamic rate.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Zach Woogen
Zach Woogen
Executive Director
VEHICLE-GRID INTEGRATION COUNCIL
Date: July 1, 2026
9